12
12.7 Preventing and treating disease
Some communicable diseases that cause problems at a global level
cannot yet be prevented by vaccination. Examples include:
• malaria - Plasmodium, the protoctist that causes malaria. It is very
evasive - it spends time inside the erythrocytes so it is protected
by self antigens from the immune system, and within an infected
individual its antigens reshuffle
HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. It
enters the macrophages and T helper cells, so it has disabled the
immune system itself.
So far scientists have been unable to develop a vaccine for these diseases,
which between them affect millions of people globally every year.
Medicines and the management of disease
Medicines can be used to treat communicable and non-communicable
diseases. Medicines can be used to treat symptoms and cure them,
making people feel better. Common medicines include painkillers,
anti-inflammatories and anti-acid medicines (which reduce
indigestion).
Medicines that cure people include chemotherapy against some cancers,
antibiotics that kill bacteria, and antifungals that kill fungal pathogens.
Sources of medicines
Penicillin was the first widely used, effective, safe antibiotic capable
of curing bacterial diseases. It comes from a mould, Penicillium
chrysogenum, famously discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1928,
when he found it growing on his Staphylococcus spp. cultures. Fleming
saw what the mould did to his bacteria but could not extract enough
to test its potential. It needed Howard Florey and Ernst Chain to
develop an industrial process for making the new drug, which has
since saved millions of lives around the world.
The medicines we use today come from a wide range of sources.
Scientists design drugs using complex computer programmes. They
can build up 3-dimensional models of key molecules in the body,
and of pathogens and their antigen systems. This allows models of
potential drug molecules to be built up which are targeted at particular
areas of a pathogen. Computers are also used to search through
enormous libraries of chemicals, to isolate any with a potentially
useful action against a specific group of feature of a pathogen, or
against the mutated cells in a cancer.
Analysis of the genomes of pathogens and genes which have been
linked to cancer enable scientists to target their novel drugs to attack
any vulnerabilities. However, many of the drugs most commonly
used in medicine are still either derived from, or based on, bioactive
compounds discovered in plants, microorganisms or other forms of
life. Table 2 lists some examples.
328
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
is when a communicable disease spreads rapidly to a lot of people at a
local or national level. A pandemic is when the same disease spreads
rapidly across a number of countries and continents.
At the beginning of an epidemic, mass vaccination can prevent the
spread of the pathogen into the wider population. When vaccines are
being deployed to prevent epidemics, they often have to be changed
regularly to remain effective.
When a significant number of people in the population have been
vaccinated, this gives protection to those who do not have immunity.
This is known as herd immunity, as there is minimal opportunity for
an outbreak to occur.
Case Study: Influenza co
Health Organisation (WHO) predicts will be most common
and most likely to cause serious disease.
Flu is a disease that has caused epidemics at intervals
throughout history. The virus that causes strain A
influenza mutates regularly, so the antigens on the
surface change too. Some forms of this virus can cross
the species barrier from animals such as birds or pigs
to people. Although people develop resistance to one
strain of flu, the next year the antigens on the surface of
the virus may have changed so much that the immune
system does not recognise it and many of the same
people become ill again.
If a flu epidemic begins, more people are vaccinated to
control infection rates. Because people travel freely and
frequently, an epidemic can spread rapidly from one
country to another. People across the world need to be
vaccinated to stop the spread of disease and stock piles
of vaccines are in place in case this becomes necessary.
SARS was a new flu-like disease that appeared in 2002
and spread from birds to people. It spread rapidly across
countries as people travelled around. However, in spite
of a lack of vaccine, careful management of cases by
isolation meant the outbreak was contained and quickly
closed down with relatively few deaths (Figure 3).
Every year in the UK older people and anyone who has
a compromised immune system are given a flu vaccine.
Every year the mixture of flu antigens in the vaccine is
different, reflecting the forms of the virus that the World
9000
8000
Cumulative cases
1 Suggest three ways in
which an outbreak of
'flu' or 'flu-like illness'
might be contained.
Cumulative recoveries
7000
6000
Number of cases
4000
3000
Active cases
2000
1000
Cumulative deaths.
soolaneado 200000 000000000000 pano pocoon
77 84 91 98 105
O
000000 code
0 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70
Days into outbreak
A Figure 3 Disease data from the SARS outbreak of 2002.
327
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
a (i) Describe the trends shown in the graph.
(4 marks)
(ii) Suggest the reasons for the difference
in the trends.
(3 marks)
b Describe the structure of a virus and explain
why viruses are not considered to be living
organisms.
(4 marks)
Ebola outbreaks usually happen in remote
areas of developing countries. They are quite
rare and usually on a relatively small scale.
Discuss why there are no effective drugs or
vaccines available to treat Ebola. (5 marks)
The graph below shows the change in incidence
of TB in patients and their HIV status, if known.
4
Practice questions
1 Doctors regularly receive advice with regard
to the prescribing of antibiotics.
Which of the following statements is/are likely to
form part of this advice.
Statement 1: avoid the use of broad
spectrum antibiotics
Statement 2: only prescribe antibiotics when
patients have a bacterial infection
Statement 3: use targeted antibiotics
whenever possible
A 1, 2 and 3 are correct
B Only 1 and 2 are correct
C Only 2 and 3 are correct
D Only 1 is correct
(1 mark)
2 a Define the term pathogen. (2 marks)
b Describe the physical barriers of plants
which act as a defence against infection
from pathogens.
(3 marks)
c Explain why plants cannot acquire
immunity.
(4 marks)
3 The 2014 Ebola virus outbreak was more
correctly called an epidemic. It is often fatal
and there is no known cure or vaccine
available.
The diagram below shows the progression
of the disease in the first few months of the
outbreak.
1800
1600
1400
HIV status unknown
I HIV uninfected
O HIV infected
number of cases
16000
14000
12000 -
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000-
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007
year
a
b
Describe and explain the changes from 1993
to 2008.
(5 marks)
Describe what is meant by the term
opportunistic infection.
(3 marks)
Explain the differences in the way TB and
HIV are transmitted.
(4 marks)
number of cases
number of people
number of deaths
Ot
)
28th March 2014
4th April 2014
11th April 2014
25th April 2014
16th May 2014
27th June 2014
21st March 2014
18th April 2014
2nd May 2014
9th May 2014
.
.
23rd May 2014
30th May 2014
6th June 2014
13th June 2014
20th June 2014
non-logarithmic scale
)
4th July 2014
11th July 2014
18th July 2014
25th July 2014
1st August 2014
333
12.7 Preventing and treating
disease
Specification reference: 4.1.1
Non-communicable diseases cannot be passed from one person
to another. They include heart disease, most types of cancer and
many diseases of the nervous, endocrine and digestive systems.
Communicable diseases are caused by pathogens and can be passed
from person to person.
When you come into contact with a foreign antigen, you need some
form of immunity to prevent you getting the disease. There are several
ways of achieving this immunity.
Natural immunity
Some forms of immunity occur naturally in the body:
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the differences between
active and passive immunity,
and between natural and
artificial immunity
the principles of vaccination
and the role of vaccination
programmes in the
prevention of epidemics
the benefits and risks of
using antibiotics to manage
bacterial infection
→ possible sources of new
medicines.
When you meet a pathogen for the first time, your immune
system is activated and antibodies are formed, which results in the
destruction of the antigen (Topic 12.6, The specific immune
system). The immune system produces T and B memory cells so
if you meet a pathogen for a second time, your immune system
recognises the antigens and can immediately destroy the pathogen,
before it causes disease symptoms. This is known as natural
active immunity. It is known as active because the body has
itself acted to produce antibodies and/or memory cells.
The immune system of a new-born baby is not mature and it
cannot make antibodies for the first couple of months. A system
has evolved to protect the baby for those first few months of
life. Some antibodies cross the placenta from the mother to her
fetus while the baby is in the uterus, so it has some immunity
to disease at birth. The first milk a mammalian mother makes is
called colostrum, which is very high in antibodies. The infant gut
allows these glycoproteins to pass into the bloodstream without
being digested. So within a few days of birth, a breast-fed baby will
have the same level of antibody protection against disease as the
mother. This is natural passive immunity and it lasts until the
immune system of the baby begins to make its own antibodies.
The antibodies the baby receives from the mother are likely to
be relevant to pathogens in its environment, where the mother
acquired them.
Artificial immunity
Some diseases can kill people before their immune system makes
the antibodies they need. Medical science can give us immunity to
some of these life-threatening diseases without any contact with
live pathogens.
325
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
In some countries, including the US, farmers routinely add antibiotics
to animal feed prophylactically to prevent animals losing condition due
to infections, and reducing business profits. There are concerns that
such routine exposure to the antibiotics accelerates natural selection
of antibiotic-resistant strains of both human and animal pathogens.
However, in the UK it is illegal to give animals routine antibiotics this
way. Evidence suggests that it is the over subscription of antibiotics to
people which is the prime cause of the rise in antibiotic resistance.
population with no
antibiotic-resistant
bacteria
chance mutation in one
bacterium produces a
gene for antibiotic-
resistance
population with a few
antibiotic-resistant
bacteria
MRSA and C. difficile
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria are a particular problem in hospitals and
care homes for older people, where antibiotics are often needed and
used. MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) and
Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) have been high-profile examples of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria. They are summarised in Table 3.
antibiotic
antibiotic A applies
a selection pressure -
there is strong natural
selection for bacteria
with a gene for
antibiotic-resistance
present
population with mainly
antibiotic-resistant
bacteria
antibiotic
% resistant
continued selection
pressure means almost
all bacteria in the
population will be
antibiotic-resistant
present
Figure 6
Development
of resistance
in bacteria to
ciprofloxacin, an
antibiotic used for
treating a wide
variety of infections
population of almost all
antibiotic-resistant
bacteria
0661
1661
1992
1993
1994
1995
9661
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Table 3
MRSA
C. difficile
bacterium carried by up to 30% of
the population on their skin or in
their nose
in the body it can cause boils,
abscesses and potentially fatal
septicaemia
was treated effectively with
methicillin, a penicillin-like antibiotic
but mutation has produced
methicillin-resistant strains
bacterium in the guts of about 5%
of the population
produces toxins that damage the
lining of the intestines, leading to
diarrhoea, bleeding and even death
not a problem for healthy person
but when commonly-used
antibiotics kill off much of the
helpful' gut bacteria it survives,
reproduces and takes hold rapidly
Antibiotic-resistant infections can be reduced in the long term by
measures including:
minimising the use of antibiotics, and ensuring that every course
of antibiotics is completed to reduce the risk of resistant individuals
surviving and developing into a resistant strain population
good hygiene in hospitals, care homes and in general - this has a
major impact on the spread of all infections, including antibiotic-
resistant strains.
331
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
It usually takes a human neutrophil under 10 minutes to engulf and
destroy a bacterium. Macrophages take longer but they undergo
a more complex process. When a macrophage has digested a
pathogen, it combines antigens from the pathogen surface membrane
with special glycoproteins in the cytoplasm called the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC). The MHC complex moves
these pathogen antigens to the macrophage's own surface membrane,
becoming an antigen-presenting cell (APC). These antigens now
stimulate other cells involved in the specific immune system response
(see Topic 11.6, Factors affecting biodiversity).
Synoptic link
Counting blood cells
In your previous studies you learnt how to examine microscope slides
and draw the cells you saw. You also learned how to count the number
of cells in a given area of a slide. Both of these skills are very important
when looking at blood smears, made by spreading a single drop of
blood very thinly across a slide. They are often stained to show up the
nuclei of the lymphocytes, making them easier to identify. Identifying
the numbers of different types of lymphocytes in a blood smear
indicates if a non-specific or specific immune response is taking place.
You learnt about smear slides in
Topic 2.1, Microscopy. It may help
to look back at Topics 6.4, The
organisation and specialisation of
cells, and 6.5, Stem cells, to remind
yourself of the different types of
cells in the blood.
Helpful chemicals
Phagocytes that have engulfed a pathogen produce chemicals called
cytokines. Cytokines act as cell-signalling molecules, informing
other phagocytes that the body is under attack and stimulating them
to move to the site of infection or inflammation. Cytokines can also
increase body temperature and stimulate the specific immune system.
Opsonins are chemicals that bind to pathogens and 'tag' them so
they can be more easily recognised by phagocytes. Phagocytes have
receptors on their cell membranes that bind to common opsonins,
and the phagocyte then engulfs the pathogen. There are a number of
different opsonins, but antibodies such as immunoglobulin G (IgG)
and immunoglobulin M (IgM) have the strongest effect.
Summary questions
1 Make a table to show the main adaptations of the body that
prevent the entry of pathogens.
(4 marks)
2 A woman gets a bad scratch from a bramble. The scratch gets
very red and hot and the next day it contains pus. Explain what
is happening
(4 marks)
(6 marks)
3 a Describe the process of phagocytosis.
b Explain how cytokines and opsonins make the
process of phagocytosis more effective than it would
be without them.
(5 marks)
319
12.6 The specific immune system
Specification reference: 4.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ modes of action of B and
T lymphocytes in the specific
immune response
the structure and functions of
antibodies
actions of opsonins,
agglutinins and anti-toxins
► the primary and secondary
immune responses
→ autoimmune diseases.
All cells have molecules called antigens on their surfaces. The body
recognises the difference between self antigens on your own cells and
non-self antigens on the cells of pathogens. Some toxins also act as
antigens. Antigens trigger an immune response, which involves the
production of polypeptides called antibodies.
The specific immune system (also known as active or acquired
immunity) is slower than the non-specific responses - it can take up
to 14 days to respond effectively to a pathogen invasion. However, the
immune memory cells mean it reacts very quickly to a second invasion
by the same pathogen.
Antibodies
Antibodies are Y-shaped glycoproteins called immunoglobulins,
which bind to a specific antigen on the pathogen or toxin that has
triggered the immune response. There are millions of different
antibodies, and there is a specific antibody for each antigen.
Antigen-binding sites
Antibodies are made up of two identical long polypeptide chains called
the heavy chains and two much shorter identical chains called the
light chains (Figure 1). The chains are held together by disulfide
bridges and there are also disulfide bridges within the polypeptide
chains holding them in shape.
Light
chain
Variable
region
(different on
different
antibodies)
Heavy
chain
Constant
region
(same in all
antibodies)
Antibodies bind to antigens with a protein-based 'lock-and-key'
mechanism similar to the complementarity between the active site of
an enzyme and its substrate. The binding site is an area of 110 amino
acids on both the heavy and the light chains, known as the variable
region. It is a different shape on each antibody and gives the antibody
its specificity. The rest of the antibody molecule is always the same, so
it is called the constant region.
Receptor
binding site
A Figure 1 All antibodies have the
same basic structure
When an antibody binds to an antigen it forms an antigen-antibody
complex.
Synoptic link
How antibodies defend the body
1 The antibody of the antigen-antibody complex acts as an opsonin
so the complex is easily engulfed and digested by phagocytes.
Most pathogens can no longer effectively invade the host cells
once they are part of an antigen-antibody complex.
Antibodies act as agglutinins causing pathogens carrying antigen-
antibody complexes to clump together. This helps prevent them
spreading through the body and makes it easier for phagocytes to
engulf a number of pathogens at the same time.
4 Antibodies can act as anti-toxins, binding to the toxins produced
by pathogens and making them harmless.
You learnt about protein structure
and glycoproteins in Topic 3.5,
Lipids and Topic 3.6, Structure
of proteins, and about the active
sites of enzymes in Topic 4.1
Enzyme action.
320
12
12.7 Preventing and treating disease
Rate / 100,000 / year
Solving the problem
The development of antibiotic-resistant bacteria is one of the biggest
health problems of our time – there is a fear that we may return to the
days when bacterial infections killed thousands of people each year
in the UK alone. Scientists are working on developing new antibiotics
using computer modelling and looking at possible sources in a wide
variety of places, including
soil microorganisms, crocodile
a health departments present in many states across the US
b first use of chlorine in water in towns
blood, fish slime, honey and the
C peak of influenza pandemic
deepest abysses of the oceans.
d last transmission of plague between humans
But at the moment, bacterial
e start of penicillin use to treat diseases
f polio vaccine introduced
resistance is building faster than
new antibiotics can be found.
In 2014 it was announced that
a new Lottery-funded prize of
£10 million named Longitude
will be reserved for anyone
who can come up with a
cost-effective, accurate and
easy-to-use test for bacterial
0+
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
infections so that doctors all
Year
over the world can use the right
A Figure 7 Graph showing crude death rate per year per 100 000 in the US
antibiotics at the right time, and
from 1900-1996
only when they are needed.
Summary questions
1 Make a flow diagram to explain how artificial active immunity
is stimulated when a vaccination is given.
(4 marks)
2 0 Suggest why some children still die of communicable diseases
o in the UK even in the 21st century.
(4 marks)
(1 mark)
3 Using the data from Figure 3.
a When did the peak of the SARS outbreak occur?
b How many people were infected during the outbreak of
the disease
c How many people died in the outbreak
d Approximately what percentage of the people affected
by the SARS virus recovered?
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(3 marks)
4 Explain how vaccinations may be used:
a to prevent rabies after a person has been bitten by a
rabid dog, fox or bat
b to control epidemics.
(2 marks)
(4 marks)
5 Using data from Figure 7, discuss the factors that affect
mortality from communicable diseases and comment on
the effects of using antibiotics to treat bacterial infections
on mortality since penicillin was first introduced.
(6 marks)
332
12
12.7 Preventing and treating disease
Artificial passive immunity
For certain potentially fatal diseases, antibodies are formed in one
individual (often an animal), extracted and then injected into the
bloodstream of another individual. This artificial passive immunity
gives temporary immunity - it doesn't last long but it can be lifesaving.
For example, tetanus is caused by a toxin released by the bacterium
Clostridium tetani, found in the soil and animal faeces. It causes the
muscles to go into spasm so you cannot swallow or breathe. People
who might be infected with tetanus (for example after a contaminated
cut) will be injected with tetanus antibodies extracted from the blood
of horses, preventing the development of the disease but not providing
long-term immunity. Rabies is another fatal disease that is treated with
a series of injections that give artificial passive immunity.
Artificial active immunity - the principles of vaccination
In artificial active immunity the immune system of the body is
stimulated to make its own antibodies to a safe form of an antigen
(a vaccine), which is injected into the bloodstream (vaccination).
The antigen is not usually the normal live pathogen, as this could
cause the disease and have fatal results. The main steps are as follows:
Synoptic link
You will learn about genetic
engineering in Topic 21.4, Genetic
engineering
The pathogen is made safe in one of a number of ways so that
the antigens are intact but there is no risk of infection. Vaccines
may contain:
killed or inactivated bacteria and viruses, for example,
whooping cough (pertussis)
attenuated (weakened) strains of live bacteria or viruses, for
example, rubella, BCG against TB, polio (vaccine taken orally)
toxin molecules that have been altered and detoxified,
for example, diphtheria, tetanus
isolated antigens extracted from the pathogen, for example,
the influenza vaccine
genetically engineered antigens, for example, the hepatitis B
vaccine.
2 Small amounts of the safe antigen, known as the vaccine, are
injected into the blood.
3 The primary immune response is triggered by the foreign antigens
and your body produces antibodies and memory cells as if you
were infected with a live pathogen.
4 If you come into contact with a live pathogen, the secondary
immune response is triggered and you destroy the pathogen
rapidly before you suffer symptoms of the disease.
The artificial active immunity provided by vaccines may last a year,
a few years or a lifetime. Sometimes boosters (repeat vaccinations)
are needed to increase the time you are immune to a disease.
Figure 2 In the UK babies are given
vaccinations against a range of diseases
including pertussis, diphtheria, tetanus,
polio, meningitis, measles, mumps,
and rubella. As a result, the number
of children who die from preventable
infections is now very low
Vaccines and the prevention of epidemics
Vaccines are used to give long-term immunity to many diseases.
However, they are also used to help prevent epidemics. An epidemic
326
12
12.2 Animal and plant diseases
12.2 Animale
each year, and over 600 000 die. The disease recurs, making people
weak and vulnerable to other infections. There is no vaccine against
malaria and limited cures, but preventative measures can very
effective. The key is to control the vector. Anopheles mosquitoes can
be destroyed by insecticides and by removing the standing water
where they breed. Simple measures such as mosquito nets, window
and door screens and long sleeved clothing can prevent them biting
people and spreading the disease.
Ring worm -a fungal disease affecting mammals including cattle,
dogs, cats and humans. Different fungi infect different species - in
cattle, ring worm is usually caused by Trichophyton verrucosum. It
causes grey-white, crusty, infectious, circular areas of skin. It is not
damaging but looks unsightly and may be itchy. Antifungal creams
are an effective cure.
Athlete's foot - a human fungal disease caused by Tinia pedia, a
form of human ring worm that grows on and digests the warm,
moist skin between the toes. It causes cracking and scaling, which is
itchy and may become sore. Antifungal creams are an effective cure.
A Figure 5 Top: Only female Anopheles
mosquitoes (top) spread malaria - they
need two blood meals before they lay their
eggs. When infected females feed they
transmit the parasite to the human host
-bottom: scanning electron microscope
showing red blood cells and Plasmodium
falciparum protozoa. < 500 magnification.
Identifying pathogens
When an outbreak of a disease occurs in plants or animals, the key to
successful control or cure is to identify the pathogens involved. Our ability to
do this has increased along with our understanding of the causes of disease
and developments in technology:
Synoptic link
You will learn about the principles
of DNA sequencing and the
development of new DNA sequencing
techniques in Chapter 21,
Manipulating genomes.
Traditionally pathogens were cultured in the laboratory and identified
using a microscope.
Monoclonal antibodies (antibodies made by cells of the immune
system that recognise one specific antigen) can be used now to identify
pathogenic organisms in both plants and animals (Topic 12.6, The
specific immune system).
DNA sequencing technology means pathogens can be identified
precisely, down to a single mutation (see Zoonotic influenza).
Summary questions
1 Make a table to summarise all
the bacterial, viral, protoctist,
and fungal diseases described
in this section, including the
main organisms that are
affected.
(6 marks)
2 Compare and contrast a
bacterial disease of plants
and of animals. (6 marks)
3 Suggest three ways in which
animal diseases and three ways
in which plant diseases may be
spread from one organism to
the next
(6 marks)
Case study: In a transplant ward, four patients developed infections caused
by methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). If the bacterium
was being transmitted to patients by a member of staff, this was a serious
outbreak. But DNA sequencing at the Sanger Institute gave rapid results -
new technology means a bacterial genome can be sequenced in less than
24 hours. Researchers showed that each of the patients had a different
strain of MRSA. The cases were not linked, so it was not a hospital-based
outbreak requiring staff to be screened or treated.
1 Why is it important to identify the pathogen causing a communicable
disease?
2 Suggest the benefits and limitations of culturing pathogens and using
a light microscope to identify them.
3 Find out as much as you can about the use of monoclonal antibodies
in the detection of plant diseases.
310
12
12.6 The specific immune system
2
3
The receptors on some of the T helper cells fit the antigens. These
T helper cells become activated and produce interleukins, which
stimulate more T cells to divide rapidly by mitosis. They form
clones of identical activated T helper cells that all carry the right
antigen to bind to a particular pathogen.
The cloned T cells may:
develop into T memory cells, which give a rapid response
if this pathogen invades the body again
produce interleukins that stimulate phagocytosis
produce interleukins that stimulate B cells to divide
develop into T killer cells and destroy infected cells.
antigen from pathogen
develop into T memory cells
cloning
by mitosis
produce interleukins that
stimulate phagocytosis
pathogen
produce interleukins that
stimulate B cells to divide
T helper cell
T cell
develop into T killer cells
antigen-presenting
T helper cell receptor that
cell, e.g. phagocyte
fits the particular antigen
Figure 2 Model of cell-mediated immunity
Humoral immunity
In humoral immunity the body responds to antigens found outside
the cells, for example bacteria and fungi, and to APCs. The humoral
immune system produces antibodies that are soluble in the blood and
tissue fluid and are not attached to cells.
B lymphocytes have antibodies on their cell-surface membrane
(immunoglobulin M or IgM) and there are millions of different types
of B lymphocytes, each with a different antibody. When an antigen on
a pathogen enters the body, a B cell with the complementary antibody
will bind to it, engulf it and process the antigens to become an APC.
1
2
Activated T helper cells bind to the B cell APC. This is clonal
selection - the point at which the B cell with the correct antibody
to overcome a particular antigen is selected for cloning.
Interleukins produced by the activated T helper cells activate the
B cells.
The activated B cell divides by mitosis to give clones of plasma cells
and B memory cells. This is clonal expansion.
Cloned plasma cells produce antibodies that fit the antigens on the
surface of the pathogen, bind to the antigens and disable them,
3
4
322
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
12
Study tip
Lymphocytes and the immune response
The specific immune system is based on white blood cells called
lymphocytes. B lymphocytes mature in the Bone marrow, while
T lymphocytes mature in the Thymus gland.
Make sure you are very clear
about the differences between an
antigen and an antibody, and the
relationship between them:
An antiGEN GENerates an antibody.
The main types of T lymphocytes:
•
Study tip
Make sure you understand what
each of the different types of
lymphocytes contribute to the
immune response.
T helper cells - these have CD4 receptors on their cell-surface
membranes, which bind to the surface antigens on APCs
(Topic 12.5). They produce interleukins, which are a type of
cytokine (cell-signalling molecule). The interleukins made by the
T helper cells stimulate the activity of B cells, which increases
antibody production, stimulates production of other types of T cells
and attracts and stimulates macrophages to ingest pathogens with
antigen-antibody complexes.
T killer cells - these destroy the pathogen carrying the antigen.
They produce a chemical called perforin, which kills the
pathogen by making holes in the cell membrane so it is freely
permeable.
T memory cells - these live for a long time and are part of the
immunological memory. If they meet an antigen a second time,
they divide rapidly to form a huge number of clones of T killer
cells that destroy the pathogen.
T regulator cells - these cells suppress the immune system,
acting to control and regulate it. They stop the immune response
once a pathogen has been eliminated, and make sure the body
recognises self antigens and does not set up an autoimmune
response. Interleukins are important in this control.
The main types of B lymphocytes:
Plasma cells – these produce antibodies to a particular antigen
and release them into the circulation. An active plasma cell only
lives for a few days but produces around 2000 antibodies per
second while it is alive and active.
B effector cells - these divide to form the plasma cell clones.
B memory cells - these live for a very long time and provide the
immunological memory. They are programmed to remember a
specific antigen and enable the body to make a very rapid response
when a pathogen carrying that antigen is encountered again.
Cell-mediated immunity
In cell-mediated immunity, T lymphocytes respond to the cells of
an organism that have been changed in some way, for example by a
virus infection, by antigen processing or by mutation (for example
cancer cells) and to cells from transplanted tissue. The cell-mediated
response is particularly important against viruses and early cancers.
1
In the non-specific defence system, macrophages engulf and digest
pathogens in phagocytosis. They process the antigens from the
surface of the pathogen to form antigen-presenting cells (APCs).
321
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
A viruses are the most virulent and they are classified further by
the proteins on their surfaces, for example A(HINI) and A(H3N3).
Flu viruses mutate regularly. The change is usually quite small, so
having flu one year leaves you with some immunity for the next.
Every so often, however there is a major change in the surface
antigens and this heralds a flu epidemic or pandemic as there are
no antibodies available. Vulnerable groups are given a flu vaccine
annually to protect against ever changing strains. There is no cure.
T
Zoonotic Influenza
A disease which people can catch from animals is known
as a zoonosis. Influenza, for example attacks a range of
animals including birds and pigs. Sometimes the virus
which causes bird flu or swine (pig) flu mutates and
becomes capable of infecting people. These new strains
can be particularly serious, because few people have any
natural immunity to them.
In March 2009 60% of the population of a small town
in Mexico became infected with a new disease and two
babies died. Some of those infected tested positive for
H1N1, a form of flu usually found in pigs, rather than the
usual human flu strains.
months after it first appeared people were infected with
H1N1 flu in 62 countries, and some of them were dying.
None of the available flu vaccines were any use against
this zoonotic virus.
Within five months almost 3000 people around the world
had died.
Fortunately, only six months after swine flu H1N1 was
first identified, scientists produced an effective vaccine.
In spite of this, recent analyses of the data suggest
between 200 000-300 000 people died as a result of
H1N1 infection in the 2009 outbreak - and up to 80% of
those deaths were in people aged 65 and younger. In a
normal seasonal flu outbreak, only around 10% of deaths
occur in people who are under 65.
H1N1 is now part of the normal seasonal flu vaccine and
scientists remain on the lookout for the next mutation
which may enable the flu virus to pass from pigs or birds
to people, known as a species jump.
A The H1N1 virus which caused a flu pandemic in 2009
1 H1N1 is a virus not a bacterium. Why does this
make it so much more dangerous?
2 Explain how modern DNA technology helps in the
case of a zoonotic disease outbreak such as this
3 a How did the age profile of the people who died
from H1N1 differ from the normal pattern of
flu-related deaths?
b Suggest reasons for this difference.
The outbreak spread to the US, where using DNA
analysis techniques, the virus was identified as a new
mutant strain of the H1N1 swine flu virus, which had
not been seen before in either pigs or people. Three
Malaria – caused by the protoctista Plasmodium and spread by the
bites of infected Anopheles mosquitoes (the vector - Topic 12.3).
The Plasmodium parasite has a complex life cycle with two hosts –
mosquitoes and people. They reproduce inside the female mosquito.
The female needs to take two blood meals to provide her with
protein before she lays her eggs - and this is when Plasmodium is
passed on to people. It invades the red blood cells, liver, and even
the brain. Around 200 million people are reported to have malaria
309
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
SEASES
12
or act as opsonins or agglutinins. This is the primary immune
response and it can take days or even weeks to become fully
effective against a particular pathogen. This is why we get ill –
the symptoms are the result of the way our body reacts when
the pathogens are dividing freely, before the primary immune
response is fully operational.
Some cloned B cells develop into B memory cells. If the body is
infected by the same pathogen again, the B memory cells divide
rapidly to form plasma cell clones. These produce the right
antibody and wipe out the pathogen very quickly, before it
can cause the symptoms of disease. This is the secondary
immune response.
5
antibody
invading
pathogen
processed
antigen
attach to antigens
on pathogen and
disable it
(= primary response)
B cell
cloning
by mitosis
plasma cell
antigen
B cell
B-cell
antibody
circulate in blood and tissue
fluid in readiness to respond
to a future infection by the
same pathogen by dividing
and developing into plasma
cells that produce antibodies
(= secondary response)
activated T helper cell -
memory cell
A Figure 3 Model of humoral immunity
secondary response
Autoimmune diseases
Sometimes the immune system stops recognising 'self' cells and
starts to attack healthy body tissue. This is termed an autoimmune
disease. Scientists still do not understand fully why this happens.
There appears to be a genetic tendency in some families, sometimes
the immune system responds abnormally to a mild pathogen or
normal body microorganisms and in some cases the T regulator cells
do not work effectively.
quantity of antibody in the blood
primary response
There are around 80 different autoimmune diseases that can cause
chronic inflammation or the complete breakdown and destruction of
healthy tissue. Immunosuppressant drugs, which prevent the immune
system working, may be used as treatments but they deprive the body
of its natural defences against communicable diseases.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
time / days
initial exposure second exposure
to the antigen to the antigen
(day 0) (day 20) in this example
Figure 4 Primary and secondary
immune responses
323
12
12.6 The specific immune system
Table 1 Some common autoimmune diseases
Treatment
Synoptic link
Look back to the Application
on gene therapy in Topic 6.5,
Stem cells, for an example of an
autoimmune disease.
Autoimmune disease
Type 1 diabetes
Body part affected
. the insulin-secreting
cells of the pancreas
• insulin injections
• pancreas transplants
immunosuppressant
drugs
Rheumatoid arthritis
joints-especially in
the hands, wrists,
ankles and feet
. no cure
• anti-inflammatory
drugs
steroids
• immunosuppressants
• pain relief
Lupus
often affects skin
and joints and
causes fatigue
can attack any organ
in the body including
kidneys, liver, lungs
or brain
no cure
• anti-inflammatory drugs
• steroids
• immunosuppressants
• various others
Summary questions
1 What are antibodies and how do they work?
(2 marks)
2 Compare the main types of I and B lymphocytes - what are
their similarities and differences?
(6 marks)
3 Discuss the problems that could arise from treating an
autoimmune disease with immunosuppressant drugs.
(3 marks)
4 The humoral immune system deals well with bacterial and
fungal infections but the cell-mediated immune system is
more effective at tackling viral infections. Explain the biology
behind this statement.
(6 marks)
324
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
Vectors
Wind - bacteria, viruses and fungal or oomycete spores may be
carried on the wind, e.g. Black sigatoka blown between Caribbean
islands, P. infestans sporangia form spores which are carried by the
wind to other potato crops/tomato plants.
Water - spores swim in the surface film of water on leaves; raindrop
splashes carry pathogens and spores, etc. Examples are spores
of P. infestans (potato blight) which swim over films of water on
the leaves.
Animals - insects and birds carry pathogens and spores from one
plant to another as they feed. Insects such as aphids inoculate
pathogens directly into plant tissues.
Humans - pathogens and spores are transmitted by hands, clothing,
fomites, farming practices and by transporting plants and crops
around the world. For example, TMV survives for years in tobacco
products, ring rot survives on farm machinery, potato sacks, etc.
A Figure 1 Disease can spread rapidly
through monocultures such as these
crop plants
Summary questions
Factors affecting the transmission of communicable
diseases in plants
A number of factors are responsible:
Explain the difference
between direct and indirect
transmission of communicable
pathogens.
(2 marks)
2 Compare and contrast direct
transmission of animal and
plant diseases. (4 marks)
planting varieties of crops that are susceptible to disease
over-crowding increases the likelihood of contact
poor mineral nutrition reduces resistance of plants
damp, warm conditions increase the survival and spread of
pathogens and spores
climate change - increased rainfall and wind promote the spread
of diseases; changing conditions allow animal vectors to spread to
new areas; drier conditions may reduce the spread of disease.
3 Compare and contrast indirect
transmission of animal and
plant diseases. (4 marks)
Suggest different
approaches to control the
spread of malaria.
(5 marks)
Preventing the spread of communicable diseases in plants
Key factors in reducing the spread of communicable
susceptible host
diseases in plants:
no
disease
Leave plenty of room between plants to minimise the
spread of pathogens.
Clear fields as thoroughly as possible - remove all
traces of plants from the soil at harvesting.
Rotate crops - the spores or bacteria will eventually
die if they do not have access to the host plant.
Follow strict hygiene practices - measures such as
washing hands, washing boots, sterilising storage
sacks, washing down machinery, etc.
Control insect vectors.
no
no
disease disease
disease
no
no
no
disease disease) disease
pathogen
favourable
environment
A Figure 2 Disease in plants is the result of the interaction
between a susceptible host, a pathogen and a favourable
environment. Modifying any of these factors can reduce the
incidence of disease
Discuss ways of controlling communicable plant
diseases with reference to the plant disease
triangle in Figure 2.
313
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
Animal diseases
The diseases that affect animals - and in particular human beings -
have a profound effect on human health and wellbeing - and on
national economies. Communicable diseases range from mild to fatal.
Examples include:
Tuberculosis (TB)
A bacterial disease of humans, cows, pigs, badgers, and deer commonly
caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and M. bovis. TB damages and
destroys lung tissue and suppresses the immune system, so the body
is less able to fight off other diseases. Worldwide in 2012 around
8.6 million people had TB of which 1.3 million died. The global rise of
HIV/AIDS has had a big impact on the numbers of people also suffering
from diseases such as TB, because people affected by HIV/AIDS are
much more likely to develop TB infections. In people TB is both
curable (by antibiotics) and preventable (by improving living standards
and vaccination).
TB, cows, and badgers 0
TB affects animal populations. In 2013, almost 33 000
UK cattle were destroyed because they were infected
with bovine TB. There is clear evidence that TB is passed
from wild animals, such as badgers or possums, to cattle,
and vice versa. This presents a problem as cattle can be
tested and culled, but it is very difficult to prevent them
becoming re-infected from wildlife, particularly when
they are out at pasture.
Scientists are still unsure how this wildlife infection
can best be controlled. One method is to cull the
wildlife source - in countries where this has been
done, TB rates in cattle have fallen substantially,
however it must be carried out carefully and thoroughly
or it can lead to greater disease spread as animals
are dispersed.
Some people, however, feel culling is not an acceptable
approach and vaccination of either cattle or the wild
animals is a better route. The test for TB cannot currently
distinguish between an infected animal and a vaccinated
animal, so current EU law bans cattle vaccines. Research
is continuing on an improved version of both the vaccine
and test. Vaccinating a population of wild animals is not
an easy task, and it is as yet an unproven method to
control the spread of disease.
The problem of TB in animals will not be solved easily, but
the research and the debate continues.
1 Why do you think it is so difficult to prevent
re-infection of cattle when they are out grazing in
the fields?
2 Suggest why EU law bans the vaccination of cattle
against TB
3 Why do you think that people are against culling
badgers, when thousands of cattle infected with TB
are slaughtered each year?
4 What might be the difficulties of vaccinating a wild
population of animals?
5 Investigate the impact of TB on infected cows and
badgers
307
12
12.2 Animal and plant diseases
Bacterial meningitis - a bacterial infection (commonly
Streptococcus pneumoniae or Neisseria meningitidis) of the meninges
of the brain (protective membranes on the surface of the brain),
which can spread into the rest of the body causing septicaemia
(blood poisoning) and rapid death. It mainly affects very young
children and teenagers aged 15-19. They have different symptoms
but in both, a blotchy red/purple rash that does not disappear
when a glass is pressed against it is a symptom of septicaemia and
immediate medical treatment is needed. About 10% of people
infected will die. Up to 25% of those who recover have some
permanent damage. Antibiotics will cure the disease if delivered
early. Vaccines can protect against some forms of bacterial
meningitis.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about TB in
Topic 12.3, The transmission
of communicable diseases
and Topic 12.7, Preventing and
treating disease.
HIV/AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) - caused
by HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), which targets
T helper cells in the immune system of the body (see Topic 12.6,
The specific immune system). It gradually destroys the immune
system so affected people are open to other infections, such as TB
and pneumonia, as well as some types of cancer. HIV/AIDS can
affect humans and some non-human primates. HIV is a retrovirus
with RNA as its genetic material. It contains the enzyme reverse
transcriptase, which transcribes the RNA to a single strand of
DNA to produce a single strand of DNA in the host cell. This
DNA interacts with the genetic material of the host cell. The
virus is passed from one person to another in bodily fluids, most
commonly through unprotected sex, shared needles, contaminated
blood products and from mothers to their babies during pregnancy,
birth or breast feeding. In 2012 around 35 million people
worldwide were living with HIV infection and about 1.6 million
died of the disease. There is as yet no vaccine and no cure, but
anti-retroviral drugs slow the progress of the disease to give many
years of healthy life. Girls and women are at particularly high
risk of HIV/AIDS in many countries. Traditional practices such as
female genital mutilation (FGM) increase the infection rate - if
the same equipment is used multiple times then this can spread
the infection, in addition, women who have undergone FGM are
also more vulnerable to infection during intercourse. Sub-Saharan
Africa is the region worst affected by HIV/AIDS, with 25 million
people living with HIV/AIDS - around 70% of the global total.
This disease has massive social and economic consequences as well
as the personal impact to each person infected.
Synoptic link
You learnt about ciliated
epithelial cells of the gaseous
exchange system in Topics 6.4,
Cell specialisation and levels of
organisation.
Influenza (flu) - a viral infection (Orthomyxoviridae spp.) of the
ciliated epithelial cells in the gas exchange system. It kills them,
leaving the airways open to secondary infection. Flu can be fatal,
especially to young children, old people and people with chronic
illnesses. Many of these deaths are from severe secondary bacterial
infections such as pneumonia on top of the original viral infection.
Flu affects mammals, including humans and pigs, and birds,
including chickens. There are three main strains - A, B and C. Strain
308
12.4 Plant defences against
pathogens
Specification reference: 4.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ plant defences against
pathogens.
Plants have evolved a number of ways to defend themselves against
the pathogens that cause communicable diseases. The waxy cuticle of
plant leaves, the bark on trees, and the cellulose cell walls of individual
plant cells act as barriers, which prevent pathogens getting in. Unlike
animals, plants do not heal diseased tissue - they seal it off and
sacrifice it. Because they are continually growing at the meristems,
they can then replace the damaged parts.
Synoptic link
You learnt about cell division and
meristems in plants in Topic 6.2,
Mitosis and Topic 6.3, Meiosis.
Recognising an attack
Plants are not passive - they respond rapidly to pathogen attacks.
Receptors in the cells respond to molecules from the pathogens, or to
chemicals produced when the plant cell wall is attacked. This stimulates
the release of signalling molecules that appear to switch on genes in
the nucleus. This in turn triggers cellular responses, which include
producing defensive chemicals, sending alarm signals to unaffected cells
to trigger their defences, and physically strengthening the cell walls.
some molecules from the
pathogen are recognised
directly by the plant cell
pathogen
some defensive
molecules directly
receptors in attack the pathogen
cell membrane
when pathogenic
enzymes break down
the cell wall the
breakdown products
are recognised
nucleus
defensive chemicals
give the alarm to other
cells before they are
attacked
signalling molecules
alert nucleus
to attack
Figure 1 The presence of a pathogen
stimulates a series of defensive
strategies in the plant
polysaccharides
(callose and lignin)
made to strengthen
the cell walls
Physical defences
When plants are attacked by pathogens they rapidly set up extra
mechanical defences. They produce high levels of a polysaccharide
called callose, which contains B-1,3 linkages and B-1,6 linkages
between the glucose monomers. Scientists still do not fully understand
the roles played by callose in the defence mechanisms of the plant but
current research suggests that:
Synoptic link
You learnt about a and B linkages
in polysaccharides in Topic 3.3,
Carbohydrates.
within minutes of an initial attack, callose is synthesised and
deposited between the cell walls and the cell membrane in cells next
to the infected cells. These callose papillae act as barriers, preventing
the pathogens entering the plant cells around the site of infection
314
12
12.2 Animal and plant diseases
Effect on plants
Disease
Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) - a virus that inſects
tobacco plants and around 150 other species
including tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, petunias
and delphiniums. It damages leaves, flowers and fruit,
stunting growth and reducing yields, and can lead to an
almost total crop loss. Resistant crop strains are available
but there is no cure.
Figure 2 TMV and its effects
Figure 3 Tomato blight
caused by the protoctista
Phytophthora infestans
Potato blight tomato blight, late blight) - caused by
the fungus-like protoctist oomycete Phytophthora infestans.
The hyphae penetrate host cells, destroying leaves, tubers
and fruit, causing millions of pounds worth of crop
damage each year. There is no cure but resistant strains,
careful management and chemical treatments can reduce
infection risk.
Black sigatoka - a banana disease caused by the fungus
Mycosphaerella fijiensis, which attacks and destroys the
leaves. The hyphae penetrate and digest the cells,
turning the leaves black. If plants are infected it can
cause a 50% reduction in yield. Resistant strains are
being developed - good husbandry and fungicide
(a chemical that kills fungi) treatment can control the
spread of the disease but there is no cure.
Figure 4 Banana leaf infected by Black sigatoka
+
Banana diseases and food security Oo
Food security is one of the
biggest issues globally. In an
ideal world everyone would
consistently have a balanced
diet provided in a sustainable
way. One of the main
problems, however, for many
people is getting enough
to eat. If plant diseases
threaten staple crops such as
rice, maize, cassava, and bananas then they threaten food
security and the survival of the population.
90% of the bananas cultivated are produced on small
farms and eaten locally. In recent years, as a result of
Black Sigatoka there has been a 40% fall in banana yields
Around 10% of bananas are produced on big
plantations for Western supermarkets. These are all
from the same clone of a variety called Cavendish so
they are genetically very similar. Black Sigatoka is
invading these plantations too.
Bananas are grown in over 130 countries where they
are important both as a food crop and economically
as a cash crop. They are the 4th most important crop
in the developing world after rice, wheat, and maize
In East Africa bananas (known as plantains) are the
staple food for around 50% of the population. People
eat around 400 kg of bananas per year
1 There are around 150 million people in East Africa.
How many bananas need to be cultivated to feed
the 50% of the population for whom bananas are
their staple diet?
2 Suggest the effect on Black Sigatoka on the
population of East Africa
3 What problems are likely to affect the control of
the disease on
a small local farms
b large plantations of Cavendish bananas
306
12
12.3 The transmission of communicable diseases
mosquitoes transmit malaria, rat fleas transmit bubonic plague,
dogs, foxes and bats transmit rabies.
• Water can also act as a vector of disease, for example, diarrhoeal
diseases.
Transmission between animals and humans
Some communicable diseases can be passed from animals to people,
for example the bird flu strain HINI and brucellosis, which is passed
from sheep to people. Minimising close contact with animals and
washing hands thoroughly following any such contact can reduce
infection rates. People can also act as vectors of some animal diseases,
sometimes with fatal results, for example foot-and-mouth disease.
Factors affecting the transmission of communicable
diseases in animals
The probability of catching a communicable disease is increased by a
number of factors:
Preventing the spread
of communicable
o diseases in humans
Key factors in reducing the spread
of communicable diseases in
humans include:
hand washing - regular hand
washing is the single most
effective way of preventing the
spread of many communicable
diseases
improvements in living and
working conditions, for example,
reducing overcrowding,
ensuring good nutrition
disposal of both bodily and
household waste effectively.
overcrowded living and working conditions
poor nutrition
a compromised immune system, including (in humans) having HIV/
AIDS or needing immunosuppressant drugs after transplant surgery
(in humans) poor disposal of waste, providing breeding sites for
vectors
climate change - this can introduce new vectors and new diseases,
for example increased temperatures promote the spread of malaria
as the vector mosquito species is able to survive over a wider area
Culture and infrastructure - in many countries traditional medical
practises can increase transmission
Socioeconomic factors – for example, a lack of trained health
workers and insufficient public warning when there is an outbreak
of disease can also affect transmission rates.
1 Explain why hand washing
is so effective at preventing
disease transmission.
2 Why does improving living
standards have such
an impact on disease
transmission?
Effective management of
household waste, leaving
no empty containers
around and keeping drains
clear, substantially reduces
the incidence of malaria in
an area. Explain why this
happens.
Research and report on
other low-tech ways in
which the incidence of
malaria can be prevented.
Transmission of pathogens between plants
Plants do not move around, cough or sneeze, yet diseases spread
rapidly through plant communities, plant pollen and seed, for example
move widely. Plants also have a less well developed immune system
than humans.
Direct transmission
This involves direct contact of a healthy plant with any part of a
diseased plant. Examples are ring rot, tobacco mosaic virus (TMV),
tomato and potato blight, and black sigatoka.
Indirect transmission
Soil contamination
Infected plants often leave pathogens (bacteria or viruses) or
reproductive spores from protoctista or fungi in the soil. These can
infect the next crop. Examples are black sigatoka spores, ring rot
bacteria, spores of P. infestans and TMV. Some pathogens (often as
spores) can survive the composting process so the infection cycle can
be completed when contaminated compost is used.
312
12.3 The transmission of
communicable diseases
Specification reference: 4.1.1
For the pathogens that cause communicable diseases to be successful,
they have to be transmissible. So how are pathogenic bacteria, viruses,
protoctista, and fungi transmitted from one host to another?
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ transmission of animal
and plant communicable
pathogens.
Transmission of pathogens between animals
Understanding how diseases are transmitted from one individual to
another allows us to work out ways to reduce or prevent it happening.
There are two main types of transmission - direct transmission and
indirect transmission.
Direct transmission
Here the pathogen is transferred directly from one individual to
another by:
Direct contact (contagious diseases):
• kissing or any contact with the body fluids of another person, for
example, bacterial meningitis and many sexually transmitted diseases
direct skin-to-skin contact, for example, ring worm, athlete's foot
microorganisms from faeces transmitted on the hands, for example,
diarrhoeal diseases.
Inoculation:
through a break in the skin, for example, during sex (HIV/AIDS)
from an animal bite, for example, rabies
through a puncture wound or through sharing needles,
e.g. septicaemia.
Ingestion:
taking in contaminated food or drink, or transferring pathogens
to the mouth from the hands, for example, amoebic dysentery,
diarrhoeal diseases.
Indirect transmission
This is where the pathogen travels from one individual to another
indirectly.
Fomites:
inanimate objects such as bedding, socks, or cosmetics can transfer
pathogens, for example, athlete's foot, gas gangrene and Staphylococcus
infections.
Droplet infection (inhalation):
Minute droplets of saliva and mucus are expelled from your
mouth as you talk, cough or sneeze. If these droplets contain
pathogens, when healthy individuals breathe the droplets in they
may become infected, for example, influenza, tuberculosis.
Vectors:
A vector transmits communicable pathogens from one host to
another. Vectors are often but not always animals, for example,
311
12.2 Animal and plant diseases
Specification reference: 4.1.1
Plant diseases
Plant diseases threaten people, because when crop plants fail,
people suffer. They may starve, economies may struggle and jobs
are lost. Plant diseases threaten ecosystems too - entire species can
be threatened.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the different types of
pathogens that can cause
communicable diseases in
plants and animals.
The threat to English oak trees
Oak woodlands are a traditional part of the British
countryside. These mighty trees (Quercus robur) can
live for centuries and are home to up to 284 species of
insects. As many as 324 different lichens have been
identified on a single tree. Future generations, however
may not see these trees in the countryside - they are
under threat from a new disease. Acute oak decline
first appeared in the UK the 1980s, having spread from
continental Europe. It causes dark fluid to ooze from the
bark, with a rapid decline in the tree and often death.
behaviour of the oakjewel beetle. For now, the advice is
to try and avoid spreading the disease by careful hygiene
procedures for both people who work in oak woodlands
and their machinery.
Scientists still do not know exactly what the cause of
this deadly tree disease is - which makes it very difficult
to understand how to prevent it spreading. Some of the
evidence so far includes:
The discovery of previously unknown bacteria in the
tree which may play a role in the disease
Evidence of oak jewel beetle activity in infected
trees - they may be important in disease
development. For example, they may act as a vector
or their presence may just be a coincidence
A massive research project is currently underway
involving DNA analysis of the microorganisms on infected
and healthy oak trees, along with a careful study of the
1 Suggest two pieces of evidence which would help
to show whether oak jewel beetles are vectors of
Acute oak decline or not.
Plant diseases are caused by a range of pathogens. They include:
Disease
Ring rot - a bacterial disease of potatoes, tomatoes, and
aubergines caused by the Gram positive bacterium
Clavibacter michiganensis. It damages leaves, tubers and
fruit. It can destroy up to 80% of the crop and there is
no cure. Once bacterial ring rot infects a field it cannot
be used to grow potatoes again for at least two years.
Effect on plants
Figure 1 Bacterial
ring rot infects a
field so it cannot
be used to grow
potatoes for at least
two years
305
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
12
Table 2 Some common medicinal drugs, derived from living organisms
Drug
Source
Action
Penicillin
commercial extraction
originally from mould
growing on melons
antibiotic - the first
effective treatment
against many common
bacterial diseases
treatment of breast cancer
Docetaxel/paclitaxel
Aspirin
(acetylsalicylic acid)
Prialt
derived originally from
yew trees
based on compounds
from sallow (willow)
bark
derived from the venom
of a cone snail from the
oceans around Australia
derived from a soil
fungus
based on digitoxin,
originally extracted
from foxgloves
painkiller, anti-coagulant,
anti-pyretic (reduces fever)
and anti-inflammatory
new pain-killing drug 1000
times more effective than
morphine
one of our most powerful
antibiotics
Vancomycin
Digoxin
powerful heart drug used
to treat atrial fibrillation
and heart failure
In the 21st century biodiversity is rapidly being lost around the world,
including the destruction of rain forests, the loss of coral reefs and loss
of habitat for natural ecosystems in countries all around the world.
This is at least partly due to human activities. Scientists have not yet
explored and identified and analysed a fraction of life on Earth. One
of many reasons why it is so important to maintain biodiversity is to
make sure we do not destroy a plant, animal or microorganism which
could give us the key to a life-saving drug.
Figure 4 Mould, a cone snail and
foxgloves – this diverse range of
organisms provide the origins of some
important medicines
Drug design for the future
Pharmacogenetics
Personalised medicine - a combination of drugs that work with your
individual combination of genetics and disease - is the direction
in which medicine is going. The human genome can be analysed
relatively rapidly and cheaply, giving a growing understanding of
the genetic basis of many diseases. The science of interweaving
knowledge of drug actions with personal genetic material is known
as pharmacogenomics. We already know that genotypes and drugs
interact. For example, in approximately 30% of all breast cancers
there is a mutation in the HER2 gene. The activity of this gene can
be shut down by specific drugs - trastuzumab (known an Herceptin)
and lapatinib. By analsying breast tumours and treating those which
have this mutation with the relevant drugs, doctors can reduce the
deaths from HER2 breast cancer by up to 50%. In future, this type of
treatment, where clinicians looks at the genome of their patients and
the genome of the invading pathogen before deciding how to treat
them, will become increasingly common.
329
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
large amounts of callose continue to be deposited in cell walls
after the initial infection. Lignin is added, making the mechanical
barrier to invasion even thicker and stronger
callose blocks sieve plates in the phloem, sealing off the infected
part and preventing the spread of pathogens
callose is deposited in the plasmodesmata between infected cells
and their neighbours, sealing them off from the healthy cells and
helping to prevent the pathogen spreading.
Chemical defences
Many plants produce powerful chemicals that either repel the insect
vectors of disease or kill invading pathogens. Some of these chemicals
are so powerful that we extract and use them or synthesise them to help
us control insects, fungi and bacteria. Some have strong flavours and are
used as herbs and spices. Examples of plant defensive chemicals include:
insect repellents - for example, pine resin and citronella from
lemon grass
insecticides – for example, pyrethrins - these are made by
chrysanthemums and act as insect neurotoxins; and caffeine -
toxic to insects and fungi
antibacterial compounds including antibiotics – for example,
phenols - antiseptics made in many different plants; antibacterial
gossypol produced by cotton; defensins - plant proteins that disrupt
bacterial and fungal cell membranes; lysosomes - organelles
containing enzymes that break down bacterial cell walls
antifungal compounds - for example, phenols - antifungals made
in many different plants; antifungal gossypol produced by cotton;
caffeine - toxic to fungi and insects; saponins - chemicals in many
plant cell membranes that interfere with fungal cell membranes;
chitinases - enzymes that break down the chitin in fungal cell walls
anti-oomycetes - for example, glucanases - enzymes made by
some plants that break down glucans; polymers found in the cell
walls of oomycetes (e.g., P.infestans)
general toxins - some plants make chemicals that can be broken
down to form cyanide compounds when the plant cell is attacked.
Cyanide is toxic to most living things.
Figure 2 Castor oil beans (shown
here) produce ricin, which is used as a
defensive chemical. Just 0.2 milligrams
would be fatal if ingested
Summary questions
1 Describe how the plant response to a pathogen attack is triggered.
(3 marks)
2 Make a table or diagram to summarise plant defences against pathogens.
(4 marks)
3 Investigate the evidence for one of the roles of callose in
plant defence responses.
(6 marks)
315
12.5 Non-specific animal defences
against pathogens
Specification reference: 4.1.1
Mammals (for example humans) have two lines of defence against
invasion by pathogens. The primary non-specific defences against
pathogens are always present or activated very rapidly. This system
defends against all pathogens in the same way. Mammals have a
specific immune response, which is specific to each pathogen but is
slower to respond (as discussed in Topic 12.6).
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the primary non-specific
defences against pathogens
in animals
► the structure and mode of
action of phagocytes
how to examine and draw cells
observed in blood smears.
ba
Non-specific defences – keeping pathogens out
The body has a number of barriers to the entry of pathogens:
The skin covers the body and prevents the entry of pathogens.
It has a skin flora of healthy microorganisms that outcompete
pathogens for space on the body surface. The skin also
produces sebum, an oily substance that inhibits the growth
of pathogens.
Many of the body tracts, including the airways of the gas exchange
system, are lined by mucous membranes that secrete sticky
mucus. This traps microorganisms and contains lysozymes, which
destroy bacterial and fungal cell walls. Mucus also contains
phagocytes, which remove remaining pathogens.
Lysozymes in tears and urine, and the acid in the stomach, also
help to prevent pathogens getting into our bodies.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the gas exchange
system in Topic 7.2, Mammalian
gaseous exchange system.
We also have expulsive reflexes. Coughs and sneezes eject
pathogen-laden mucus from the gas exchange system, while
vomiting and diarrhoea expel the contents of the gut along with
any infective pathogens.
Blood clotting and wound repair
If you cut yourself, the skin is breached and pathogens can enter the
body. The blood clots rapidly to seal the wound. When platelets come
into contact with collagen in skin or the wall of the damaged blood
vessel, they adhere and begin secreting several substances. The most
important are:
Synoptic link
You learnt about the enzymatic-
control of the blood clotting
cascade in Topic 4.4, Cofactors,
coenzymes, and prosthetic groups.
thromboplastin, an enzyme that triggers a cascade of reactions
resulting in the formation of a blood clot (or thrombus, Figure 1)
serotonin, which makes the smooth muscle in the walls of the
blood vessels contract, so they narrow and reduce the supply of
blood to the area.
The clot dries out, forming a hard, tough scab that keeps pathogens
out. This is the first stage of wound repair. Epidermal cells below the
scab start to grow, sealing the wound permanently, while damaged
blood vessels regrow. Collagen fibres are deposited to give the new
316
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
12.1 Animal and plant pathogens
Specification reference: 4.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the different types of
pathogen that can cause
communicable diseases in
plants and animals.
Communicable diseases are caused by infective organisms known as
pathogens. Pathogens include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protoctista.
Each has particular characteristics that affect the way they are spread
and the ways we can attempt to prevent or cure the diseases they cause.
A communicable disease can be passed from one organism to another.
In animals they are most commonly spread from one individual of
a species to another, but they can also be spread between species.
Communicable diseases in plants are spread directly from plant to
plant. Vectors, which carry pathogens from one organism to another,
are involved in the spread of a number of important plant and animal
diseases. Common vectors include water and insects.
Globally, around 13 million people a year die as a result of communicable
diseases. That is 23% of all deaths - non-communicable diseases cause
around 68% of deaths, and injuries cause the rest. Communicable
diseases are also a major problem in domestic and wild animals, and in
the plants on which life on Earth depends.
Types of pathogens
Bacteria
There are probably more bacteria than any other type of organism.
A small proportion of these bacteria are pathogens, causing
communicable diseases.
Bacteria are prokaryotes, so they have a cell structure that is very
different from the eukaryotic organisms they infect. They do not have
a membrane-bound nucleus or organelles.
Bacteria can be classified in two main ways:
. By their basic shapes – they may be rod shaped (bacilli), spherical
(cocci), comma shaped (vibrios), spiralled (spirilla), and corkscrew
(spirochaetes).
Synoptic link
You learnt about prokaryotic cell
structure in Topic 2.6, Prokaryotic
and eukaryotic cells.
pair of
chain of
cocci
(streptococci)
cluster of
cocci
(staphylococci)
vibrio
(comma)
bacillus chain of coccus
(rod) bacilli (spherical) cocci
(known as
streptobacilli)
A Figure 1 The main types of bacteria
spirillum
(spiral)
spirochaete
(corkscrew)
302
12
12.7 Preventing and treating disease
Synthetic biology
Another major step forward in drug development is synthetic
biology. Using the techniques of genetic engineering, we can develop
populations of bacteria to produce much needed drugs that would
otherwise be too rare, too expensive or just not available. Synthetic
biology enables the use of bacteria as biological factories. Mammals have
also been genetically modified to produce much needed therapeutic
proteins in their milk. This re-engineering of biological systems for new
purposes has great potential in medicine. Nanotechnology is another
strand of synthetic biology, where tiny, non-natural particles are used
for biological purposes – for example, to deliver drugs to very specific
sites within the cells of pathogens or tumours.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the
human genome, synthetic biology,
and genetic engineering in
Chapter 21, Manipulating genomes
and Chapter 22, Cloning and
biotechnology.
The antibiotic dilemma
At the beginning of the 20th century, 36% of all deaths - and 52% of
all childhood deaths - were from communicable diseases. Antibiotics
interfere with the metabolism of the bacteria without affecting the
metabolism of the human cells - this is called selective toxicity. They
gave doctors, for the first time, medicines that were effective against
bacteria, so antibiotics were understandably, widely used. By the start
of this century, the numbers of children dying per year had fallen
dramatically and, of those remaining few deaths, only about 7% were
due to communicable diseases.
polymixines make holes
in cell membrane
altering its permeability
penicillin and cephalosporins-
weaken the cell wall so
bacterium is more easily
damaged by immune reaction
There are many different types of bacteria and a range of antibiotics
is used against them, including streptomycin, amoxicillin (very like
penicillin), cephalosporins, tetracyclines, sulfonamides, polymixines,
ampicillin, and vancomycin. In 2014 up to 1 in 6 of all prescriptions
were still for antibiotics. They are often used for relatively minor
infections where the immune system of the patient would deal with
the infection with no serious difficulty.
sulfonamides interfere
with metabolic reactions
Unfortunately, antibiotics are becoming less effective in the treatment
of bacterial diseases. Bacteria are becoming resistant to more and
more antibiotics. This trend started with penicillin - now there are
microorganisms that are resistant to all of the antibiotics we have.
DNA
tetracyclines and streptomycin
inhibit protein synthesis
A Figure 5 Some of the different ways in
which antibiotic drugs damage bacteria
The development of antibiotic resistance
There is an evolutionary race between scientists and bacteria. An
antibiotic works because a bacterium has a binding site for the drug,
and a metabolic pathway that is affected by the drug. If a random
mutation during bacterial reproduction produces a bacterium that is
not affected by the antibiotic, that is the one which is best fitted to
survive and reproduce, passing on the antibiotic resistance mutation to
the daughter cells. Bacteria reproduce very rapidly, so once a mutation
occurs it does not take long to grow a big population of antibiotic-
resistant bacteria.
In a few decades we have reached a stage where increasing numbers
of bacterial pathogens are resistant to most or all of our antibiotics.
330
12
12.5 Non-specific animal defences against pathogens
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the
control of body temperature in
Chapter 15, Homeostasis.
Fevers
Normal body temperature of around 37 °C is maintained by the
hypothalamus in your brain. When a pathogen invades your body,
cytokines stimulate your hypothalamus to reset the thermostat and
your temperature goes up. This is a useful adaptation because:
most pathogens reproduce best at or below 37 °C. Higher
temperatures inhibit pathogen reproduction
the specific immune system works faster at higher temperatures.
Phagocytosis
Phagocytes are specialised white cells that engulf and destroy
pathogens. There are two main types of phagocytes – neutrophils
and macrophages (Figure 2).
Phagocytes build up at the site of an infection and attack pathogens.
Sometimes you can see pus in a spot, cut or wound. Pus consists of
dead neutrophils and pathogens.
The stages of phagocytosis
1 Pathogens produce chemicals that attract phagocytes.
2 Phagocytes recognise non-human proteins on the pathogen. This
is a response not to a specific type of pathogen, but simply a cell or
organism that is non-self.
3 The phagocyte engulfs the pathogen and encloses it in a vacuole
called a phagosome.
4 The phagosome combines with a lysosome to form a
phagolysosome.
5 Enzymes from the lysosome digest and destroy the pathogen.
Figure 3 Common phagocytes
in the body: 70% of white blood cells
are neutrophils (top) with their multi-
lobed nuclei and rapid action against
pathogens. Macrophages (bottom), with
their simpler round nuclei, make up 4%
of the white blood cells and are involved
in both the non-specific defence
system and the specific immune
system. Coloured transmission electron
micrographs, x 2000 magnification
MHC complex
1
phagocyte attracted by pathogen
chemicals produced
by pathogen
antigen
Glysosome
nucleus
6
phagocyte
MHC/antigen complex is
displayed on phagocyte membrane,
making an antigen presenting cell
phagocyte recognises
pathogen as
antigen
non-self and
10 minutes
binds to it
MHC
digested pathogen absorbed
phagocyte engulfs
phagosome
by phagocyte-antigens
the pathogen to
combine with MHC in the
form phagosome-
cytoplasm
lysosome moves
phagolysosome
towards phagosome and combines
with it, forming phagolysosome
in phagolysosome, enzymes
break down the pathogen
Figure 4 Phagocytosis - a key process in both the non-specific and specific
defence systems of the body
318
12
12.1 Animal and plant pathogens
means they can spread rapidly and widely through crop plants. Fungal
diseases of plants cause hardship and even starvation in many countries
around the world.
Pathogens - modes of action
Damaging the host tissues directly
Many types of pathogen damage the tissues of their host organism. It
is this damage, combined with the way in which the body of the host
responds to the damage, that causes the symptoms of disease. Different
types of pathogens attack and damage the host tissues in different ways:
•
1. attachment of virus to
host cell
2. insertion of viral nucleic
acid
Viruses take over the cell metabolism. The viral genetic material
gets into the host cell and is inserted into the host DNA. The virus
then uses the host cell to make new viruses which then burst out
of the cell, destroying it and then spread to infect other cells
Some protoctista also take over cells and break them open as the
new generation emerge, but they do not take over the genetic
material of the cell. They simply digest and use the cell contents as
they reproduce. Proctists which cause malaria are an example of this.
Fungi digest living cells and destroy them. This combined with the
response of the body to the damage caused by the fungus gives the
symptoms of disease.
3. replication of viral
nucleic acid
4. synthesis of viral protein
5. assembly of virus
6. lysis of host cell
particles
A Figure 4 This virus is a
bacteriophage and it destroys the
bacterial cell as the new viruses burst
out. Viruses have the same effect in
multicellular eukaryotic organisms
such as animals and plants
Producing toxins which damage host tissues:
Most bacteria produce toxins that poison or damage the host cells
in some way, causing disease. Some bacterial toxins damage the
host cells by breaking down the cell membranes, some damage or
inactivate enzymes and some interfere with the host cell genetic
material so the cells cannot divide. These toxins are a by-product
of the normal functioning of the bacteria
Some fungi produce toxins which affect the host cells and
cause disease.
Summary questions
1 a Explain what is meant by the term 'communicable disease'. (2 marks)
b Produce a pie chart to show the main causes of death
worldwide each year.
(4 marks)
2 Make a table to compare bacteria, viruses, protoctista, and fungi. (4 marks)
0 If approximately 13 million people die of communicable diseases
each year, give an approximate figure for the numbers who die
of non-communicable disease and explain how you arrived at
your answer.
(4 marks)
4 Give four ways in which pathogens can attack the cells of their
host organism and cause disease.
(6 marks)
5 a Explain the difference between the way viruses and
protists cause disease.
(4 marks)
b Suggest why viruses are described as the ultimate parasite. (2 marks)
304
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
12
Synoptic link
By their cell walls - the two main types of bacterial cell walls
have different structures and react differently with a process called
Gram staining. Following staining Gram positive bacteria look
purple-blue under the light microscope, for example methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Gram negative bacteria
appear red, for example the gut bacteria Escherichia coli (E.coli). This
is useful because the type of cell wall affects how bacteria react to
different antibiotics (a compound that kills or inhibits the growth
of bacteria).
You learnt about the structure
of proteins and nucleic acids in
Topic 3.1 Biological elements.
Viruses
protein
coat
nucleic
acid
strand
Viruses are non-living infectious agents. At 0.02-0.3 um in diameter,
they are around 50 times smaller in length than the average bacterium.
The basic structure of a virus is some genetic material (DNA or
RNA) surrounded by protein. Viruses invade living cells, where the
genetic material of the virus takes over the biochemistry of the host
cell to make more viruses. Viruses reproduce rapidly and evolve
by developing adaptations to their host, which makes them very
successful pathogens. All naturally occurring viruses are pathogenic.
They cause disease in every other type of organism. There are even
viruses that attack bacteria, known as bacteriophages. They take over
the bacterial cells and use them to replicate, destroying the bacteria
at the same time. People now use bacteriophages both to identify and
treat some diseases, and they are very important in scientific research.
Medical scientists consider viruses to be the ultimate parasites.
the human
immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)
Herpes simplex virus
causes cold sores
tobacco mosaic virus
infects tobacco plants
bacteriophages
are viruses which
infect bacteria
Protoctista (protista)
The protoctista (now widely known as protista) are a group of
eukaryotic organisms with a wide variety of feeding methods. They
include single-celled organisms and cells grouped into colonies. A
small percentage of protoctista act as pathogens, causing devastating
communicable diseases in both animals and plants. The protists which
cause disease are parasitic - they use people or animals as their host
organism. Pathogenic protists may need a vector to transfer them to
their hosts - malaria and sleeping sickness are examples - or they may
enter the body directly through polluted water - amoebic dysentery
and Giardia are examples of these.
Figure 2 The structure of viruses
Fungal hyphae (filamentous fungus)
vesicles adding mitochondria - most are found near
new cell wall the growing tips of hyphae
OA
putoplasm - lese V
dense in old
hyphae than in
young ones
Fungi
Fungal diseases are not a major problem in animals, but they can
cause devastation in plants. Fungi are eukaryotic organisms that are
ingi are eukarvotic organisms that are
often multicellular, although the yeasts which cause human diseases
such as thrush are single-celled. Fungi cannot photosynthesise and
they digest their food extracellularly before absorbing the nutrients.
Many fungi are saprophytes which means they feed on dead and
decaying matter. However some fungi are parasitic, feeding on
living plants and animals. These are the pathogenic fungi which
cause communicable diseases. Because fungal infections often affect
the leaves of plants, they stop them photosynthesising and so can
quickly kill the plant. When fungi reproduce they produce millions
of tiny spores which can spread huge distances, this adaptation
storage granule
nucleus cell wall
vacuole
Yeast (unicellular fungus)
cytoplasm
nucleus
vacuole O m itochondrion
Figure 3 The structure of fungi
303
12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
damaged tissues
platelets activated by
damaged tissue
release
Ca2+
thromboplastin
prothrombin
catalyses
thrombin
catalyses
forms
fibrinogen
fibrin
clot
Figure 1 The blood clotting cascade - once a
clot forms, blood cannot leak out of the body and
pathogens cannot get in
A Figure 2 Scanning electron micrograph showing red blood cells in a
fibrin mesh. x 800 magnification
tissue strength. Once the new epidermis reaches normal thickness, the
scab sloughs off and the wound is healed.
Inflammatory response
The inflammatory response is a localised response to pathogens
(or damage or irritants) resulting in inflammation at the site of a
wound. Inflammation is characterised by pain, heat, redness, and
swelling of tissue.
Mast cells are activated in damaged tissue and release chemicals
called histamines and cytokines.
Histamines make the blood vessels dilate, causing localised heat
and redness. The raised temperature helps prevent pathogens
reproducing.
Histamines make blood vessel walls more leaky so blood plasma is
forced out, once forced out of the blood it is known as tissue fluid.
Tissue fluid causes swelling (oedema) and pain.
Cytokines attract white blood cells (phagocytes) to the site. They
dispose of pathogens by phagocytosis.
If an infection is widespread, the inflammatory response can cause a
whole-body rash.
Synoptic link
Non-specific defences - getting rid of pathogens
If the pathogens get into the body, the next lines of defence are
adaptations to prevent them growing or to destroy them.
You learnt about phagocytosis
as a form of bulk transport in
Topic 5.4, Active transport.
317
