11
11.7 Reasons for maintaining biodiversity
Continuous monoculture results in soil depletion - a reduction
in the diversity of soil nutrients. It happens because the crop
takes the same nutrients out of the soil year after year and is then
harvested, not left for the nutrients to be recycled. This depletion
of soil nutrients makes the ecosystem more fragile. The crops it can
support will be weaker, increasing vulnerability to opportunistic
insects, plant competitors, and microorganisms. The farmer will
become increasingly dependent on expensive pesticides, herbicides,
and fertilisers in order to maintain productivity.
High biodiversity provides protection against abiotic stresses
(including extreme weather and natural disasters) and disease.
When biodiversity is not maintained, a change in conditions or
a disease can destroy entire crops. The Irish potato famine of
the 1840s was a direct consequence of the reliance on only two
varieties of potato. When a new disease spread to the area (the
oomycete Phytophthora infestans), neither species contained alleles
for genetic resistance, so the entire crop was destroyed. This led
to widespread famine and the deaths of around 1 million people.
Areas rich in biodiversity provide a pleasing, attractive environment
that people can enjoy. Highly biodiverse areas can promote tourism
in the region, with its associated economic advantages.
The greater the diversity in an ecosystem, the greater the potential
for the manufacture of different products in the future. These
products may be beneficial to humans. For example, it may
make food production more financially viable or provide cures or
treatment for disease.
Plant varieties are needed for cross breeding, which can lead to better
characteristics such as disease resistance or increased yield. The wild
relatives of cultivated crop plants provide an invaluable reservoir of
genetic material to aid the production of new varieties of crops. Also,
through genetic engineering, scientists aim to use genes from wild
plants and animals to make crop plants and animals more efficient,
thus reducing the land required to feed more people. If these wild
varieties are lost, the crop plants may themselves also become more
vulnerable to extinction. This is also important ecologically.
Ecological reasons
All organisms are interdependent on others for their survival.
The removal of one species may have a significant effect on
others, for example a food source or a place to live may be lost.
For example, decomposers break down dead plant and animal
remains, releasing nutrients into the soil, which plants later use
for healthy growth. Plants rely on bees for pollination - this is
important for both wild plant species and commercially produced
crops. Fruit farmers use bees to pollinate their crops; a decrease in
the wild bee population would decrease crop yields.
Some species play a key role in maintaining the structure of an
ecological community. These are known as keystone species.
They have a disproportionately large effect on their environment
292
11.7 Reasons for maintaining
biodiversity
Specification reference: 4.2.1
Can you imagine what it would be like to live in a world where
all the landscapes looked the same? Not only would it be visually
(aesthetically) unappealing, but biodiversity levels would be low as
only a small number of organisms would be supported by the habitats.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
the ecological, economic
and aesthetic reasons for
maintaining biodiversity.
Reasons for maintaining biodiversity
It is important to maintain biodiversity for a number of reasons. These
reasons can be broadly arranged into three groups - aesthetic, economic
and ecological, although some reasons fall across more than one category.
Aesthetic reasons
The presence of different plants and animals in our environment
enriches our lives. For example, you might like to relax on a
beach, walk in your local woodland or park or visit a rainforest.
The natural world provides inspiration for people such as
musicians and writers, who in turn provide pleasure for many
others through music and books.
Studies have shown that patients recover more rapidly from stress
and injury when they are supported by plants and a relatively
natural environment.
Economic reasons
If biodiversity in an ecosystem is maintained, levels of long-term
productivity are higher.
Soil erosion and desertification may occur as a result of
deforestation. These reduce a country's ability to grow crops
and feed its people, which can lead to resource- and economic-
dependence on other nations.
It is important to conserve all organisms that we use to make
things. Non-sustainable removal of resources, such as hardwood
timber, will eventually lead to the collapse of industry in an area.
Once all or enough of the raw material has been lost, it does
not become economically viable to continue the industry. Note
that even when 'sustainable' methods are used - for example
replanting forest areas - the new areas will not be as biodiverse as
the established habitats they replace.
Large-scale habitat and biodiversity losses mean that species with
potential economic importance may become extinct before they
are even discovered. For example, undiscovered species in tropical
rainforests may be chemically or medically useful. A number of
marine species use a chemical-based defence mechanism. These are
rich potential sources of new and economically important medicines.
A Figure 1 Most people would agree
that natural, biodiverse areas are more
attractive than acres of cultivated
crops and concrete. Visiting these
areas provides space for relaxation and
exercise, both essential for a healthy life.
Protecting these landscapes is therefore
essential for human well-being
291
BIODIVERSITY
77
The species evenness in an area can then be calculated by comparing
the total number of each organism present. Populations of plants
or animals that are similar in size or density represent an even
community and hence a high species evenness. Species evenness
can also be expressed as a ratio between the numbers of each
organism present.
Measuring abiotic factors
Abiotic factors are the non-living conditions in a habitat. They have
a direct effect on the living organisms that reside there. Examples
are the amount of light and water available. To enable them to draw
conclusions about the organisms present and the conditions they need
for survival, scientists normally measure these conditions at every
sampling point.
Table 1 summarises the ways in which common abiotic factors
can be measured.
Table 1
Abiotic factor
Sensor used
Example unit of
measurement
wind speed
anemometer
ms-1
light intensity
relative humidity
mg dm-3
pH
light meter
humidity sensor
pH probe
temperature probe
dissolved oxygen probe
pH
temperature
°C
oxygen content in water
mg dm-
Many abiotic factors can be measured quickly and accurately using a
range of sensors, which are advantageous for a number of reasons:
Rapid changes can be detected.
• Human error in taking a reading is reduced.
A high degree of precision can often be achieved.
Data can be stored and tracked on a computer.
Belt transect in a National Park 00
A group of students was asked to investigate the impact of human land
use in a National Park on the species of plants which were found there. The
students decided to carry out a belt transect of open countryside, across a
main walking path, in mid-Dartmoor.
Part of the data the students collected is shown. Data was collected
on the percentage cover of six species, and the maximum height of
vegetation at each position was noted.
277
BIODIVERSITY
countries or continents today, as well as far-reaching global
implications for the future.
The need to produce reliable data for issues of this scale is paramount.
Despite the weight of evidence for climate change, some scientists still
believe that a causal link between human activity and climate change
is yet to be established.
Global warming refers to a rise in the Earth's mean surface
temperature. The Earth's climate has shown fluctuations in
temperature throughout its history, so it is not possible to say for
certain that humans are directly causing global warming. However,
carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere have significantly increased
since the industrial revolution, trapping more thermal energy in the
atmosphere. Therefore most scientists believe that human activities are
contributing to global warming.
A Figure 5 These Joshua trees
(Yucca brevifolia) are an example of a
xerophyte. A xerophyte is a species of
plant that has adapted to survive in an
environment with little water, such as a
desert or an ice-or snow-covered region
in the Alps or the Arctic
If global warming continues biodiversity will be affected. For example:
•
Synoptic link
You learned about xerophyte
adaptations in Topic 9.5, Plant
adaptations to water availability.
The melting of the polar ice caps could lead to the extinction of
the few plant and animal species living in these regions. Some
species of animals present in the Arctic are migrating further and
further north to find favourable conditions as their habitat shrinks.
Increasing global temperatures would allow temperate plant and
animal species to live further north than currently.
Rising sea levels from melting ice caps and the thermal expansion
of oceans could flood low-lying land, reducing the available
terrestrial habitats. Saltwater would flow further up rivers,
reducing the habitats of freshwater plants and animals living in the
river and surrounding areas.
Higher temperatures and less rainfall would result in some plant
species failing to survive, leading to drought-resistant species
(xerophytes, Figure 5) becoming more dominant. The loss
of non-drought-resistant species of plants would lead to the
loss of some animal species dependent on them as a food
source. These would be replaced by other species that feed
on the xerophytes.
Insect life cycles and populations will change as they adapt to
climate change. Insects are key pollinators of many plants, so
if the range of an insect changes, it could affect the lives of the
plants it leaves behind, causing extinction. And as insects carry
many plant and animal pathogens, if tropical insects spread, this
in turn could lead to the spread of tropical diseases towards
the poles.
If climate change is slow, species may have time to adapt (for example
by eating a different food source) or to migrate to new areas. This will
lead to a loss of native species, but in turn other species may move
into the area - so biodiversity would not necessarily be lost. The
species mix would simply change.
Figure 6 The small red-eyed
damselfly (Erythromma viridulum).
Changing species distribution provides
evidence for climate change. Since
1980, 34 of the 37 British species of
dragonfly and damselfly have expanded
their range northwards by an average
of 74 km. This is evidence that the UK's
climate is growing warmer
289
11
11.6 Factors affecting biodiversity
Loss of biodiversity in the UK 00
the result of the increase in the world human population.
This has resulted in large areas of land being cleared
worldwide, to meet the demand for food. Twelve to fifteen
million hectares of forest are lost worldwide each year -
the equivalent of 36 football fields per minute. These
highly diverse habitats are replaced with agricultural land,
which has far lower levels of biodiversity.
Conservation agencies have estimated the percentage of
various habitats that have been lost in the UK since 1900.
Their findings are summarised in Table 1.
A Figure 7 Heathland
3
1 State the key reason why the habitats stated in
Table 1 have been lost over the past century.
Compare the proportion of chalk grassland
OC
that has been lost since 1900 with lowland
mixed woodland.
0 There are approximately 1500 hectares
of hay meadow in the UK. What was the
equivalent figure in 1900?
Farmers can receive financial subsidies for
farming areas of land in a traditional, sustainable
manner. State and explain how this may affect
species diversity in these areas.
A Figure 8 Woodland
Scientists have estimated that the present worldwide rate
of extinction is between 100 and 1000 times greater than
at any other point in evolutionary history. This is primarily
Table 1
Habitat
Main reason for habitat loss
Habitat loss
since 1900 (%)
95
80
Hay meadow
Chalk grassland
Lowland fens and wetlands
Limestone pavements in England
Lowland heaths on acid soils
Lowland mixed woodland
Hedgerows
50
45
Conversion to highly productive grass and silage
Conversion to highly productive grass and silage
Drainage and reclamation of land for agriculture
Removal for sale as rockery stone
Conversion to grasslands and commercial forests
Conversion to commercial conifer plantations and farmland
40
40
30
To make larger fields to accommodate farm machinery
Summary questions
1 State and explain how the following factors reduce 2 Explain why there is a reduction in species diversity
species diversity:
when an area of forest is cleared to create additional
a monoculture
(2 marks) land for the grazing of cattle.
(2 marks)
b building of roads
(2 marks)
C use of pesticides.
(2 marks) 3 Suggest and explain ways in which climate change
can affect the biodiversity in an area. (3 marks)
290
11
11.3 Sampling techniques
Species
present
Grasses
Heathers
Quadrat position along line, from starting point/m
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
25 5 10 85 85 80 75 40 450
10 15 0 0 0 0 0 10 10 35
5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
90 10 0 0 0 30 25
30 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 5 15 20 25 20 5
Mosses
10
Gorse
20
0
Bracken
Bare ground
Maximum
vegetation
height / cm
70
65
45
10
10
5
5
30
70
65
The students produced the following graph of this data:
grasses
heathers
percentage cover
mosses
* gorse
* bracken
-- bare ground
Summary questions
0
1
8
9
2 3 4 5 6 7
distance along belt transect/m
Questions
1 State which piece of equipment
you would use to collect
sample data on the following:
a number of beetles on an
oak tree trunk
b number of moths in an area
of woodland
cpH of soil along a line
transect
d number of plant species
present on a school
playing field. (4 marks)
1 Describe how you would use a transect to obtain the data which the
students collected.
2 Explain why random sampling would not be appropriate to develop
this data.
3 Plot a graph showing how the maximum vegetation height varied with
distance along the belt transect.
4 Using the data gathered by the students, suggest how land use in this
region affects the vegetation present.
5 A range of abiotic factors may also affect the species in the region
studied. Suggest and explain how you would investigate the effect of
one of these factors on the vegetation present.
6 Evaluate the quality of the data collected by the students.
2 Describe the advantages of
using a temperature probe
over a thermometer. (2 marks)
3 Discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of the different
ways to measure species
evenness. (4 marks)
278
11
Chapter 11 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 Which of the following can be used to
measure the biodiversity of an area?
A Student's t-test
B Simpson's Index
C Correlation coefficient
D Standard deviation
(1 mark)
2 Which of the following statements are true
with respect to what you would expect to
find in an area of high biodiversity?
Statement 1: A large number of successful
species
Statement 2: Complex food chains
Statement 3: An extreme environment
A 1, 2 and 3 are correct
B Only 1 and 2 are correct
C Only 2 and 3 are correct
D Only 1 is correct
(1 mark)
3 The table below contains a number of terms
ecologists use when studying biodiversity.
Complete the table using the appropriate
term or description.
(5 marks)
Term
Description
The variety of living organisms present in an
area.
Genetic biodiversity b.
A sample produced without bias; each
individual has an equal likelihood of selection.
Abiotic factor
A sampling technique where different areas
within a habitat are identified and sampled
separately; for example, by using a line
transect.
Britain. Its numbers have decreased
by 94% since 1942 and it is in danger
of becoming extinct in the wild. There
are thought to be approximately 2500
black poplars surviving in Britain today.
Use the information above to calculate
the original number of black poplar trees
in 1942. Show your working. (2 marks)
Species such as the black poplar
contribute to biodiversity in the UK.
Suggest three reasons why the
conservation of the black poplar is
important.
(3 marks)
Botanic gardens are important in the
conservation of plant species.
(i) State why the conservation of
a species in a botanic garden is
described as ex situ. (1 mark)
(ii) Many botanic gardens use seed banks
as a method of plant conservation.
Outline the advantages of using a
seed bank, as opposed to adult plants,
in order to conserve an endangered
plant species.
(4 marks)
(iii) Suggest why it is important to ensure
that, for each species, the seeds in a
seed bank have been collected from
several different sites in the wild.
(3 marks) OCR F212 2012
On a biology field trip, a pair of students
collected some data about plant species in an
area of ash woodland. Their results are shown
in the table.
species Number of n/N (n/N]?
individuals (n)
Dog's mercury 40
Wild strawberry 13 0.13 0.0169
Common avens 43
Wood sorrel 4
N=
(n/N)2 =
1- ((n/N)2) =
6
4
When studying biodiversity, scientists often
take samples of a habitat.
a (i) State what is meant by the term
sampling.
(1 mark)
(ii) State two reasons why sampling is
carried out.
(1 mark)
b Describe the difference between random
and non-random sampling, stating one
advantage of each technique. (3 marks)
Explain how you could sample an area of
grassland, to study the organisms present.
(6 marks)
a The black poplar tree was once a
common tree throughout southern
a
(i) Use the information in the table to
work out Simpson's index of diversity
(D) for the area of woodland sampled
using the formula: D = 1- (E(n/N)2)
Copy and complete the table.
5
300
11
11.7 Reasons for maintaining biodiversity
Alligators make burrows for nesting and to stay warm.
When they abandon their burrow, fresh water fills
the space, which is used by other species during the
dry season for breeding and drinking. Alligators are
predators, which also contributes to the maintenance
of biodiversity in these habitats.
It is estimated that up to 200 species rely on
prairie-dog colonies, primarily due to their tunnelling
activities. Prairie colonies provide a food source and
burrows for other animals such as snakes. Their
tunnelling aerates the soil, which, combined with
their droppings, leads to a redistribution of nutrients.
It also channels rainwater into the water table. These
processes help to maintain a biodiverse range of
plant life in the region. So essential is the prairie dog
to its habitat that its loss would lead to a change in
the ecosystem itself.
A Figure 3 American alligators (Aligator mississippiensis)
are keystone species in the Everglade wetlands
1 Define the term 'keystone species'.
2 Explain why keystone species are often predators.
3 The purple coneflower is a plant species found
on the North American prairies. Extracts from
the plant have anti-bacterial properties, which
have been used for centuries to treat fevers
and infections. Explain how a reduction in the
population of prairie dogs could affect the number
of purple coneflowers in this habitat.
A Figure 4 Prairie dogs (Cynomys spp.) are a keystone
species for the prairies - their existence adds to a
diversity of life
Summary questions
1 State the differences between aesthetic, economic, and ecological
arguments for maintaining biodiversity.
(1 mark)
2
Suggest two ethical reasons why we should
maintain biodiversity.
(3 marks)
3 The Irish potato famine of the 1840s had a devastating effect
on the population.
a Explain how a lack of agricultural biodiversity led
to this disaster.
b Suggest and explain how a similar famine could be
prevented from occurring in the future.
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
294
11
11.6 Factors affecting biodiversity
water. By destroying weeds, plant diversity is reduced directly,
and animal diversity may also be reduced by the removal of an
important food source.
Monoculture - many farms specialise in the production of only
one crop, with many acres of land being used for the growth
of one species. This has an enormous local effect in lowering
biodiversity as only one species of plant is present. As relatively
few animal species will be supported by only one type of plant,
this results in low overall biodiversity levels. The growth of vast
oil palm plantations is one of the leading causes of rainforest
deforestation, leading to a loss of habitat for critically endangered
species like the rhino.
La
Figure 4 This rice field covers a
huge area of land. It is an example of
monoculture - only rice is being grown
Climate change
In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
released a report summarising scientists' current understanding of
climate change. The report took six years to produce and involved over
2500 scientific personnel in its production. Some of the key findings
include the following:
The warming trend over the last 50 years (about 0.13°C per
decade) is nearly twice that for the previous 100 years.
The average amount of water vapour in the atmosphere has
increased since the 1980s over land and ocean. The increase is
broadly consistent with the extra water vapour that warmer air
can hold.
Since 1961, the average temperature of the global ocean down
to depths of 3 km has increased. The ocean has been absorbing
more than 80% of the heat added to the climate system, causing
seawater to expand and contributing to sea-level rise.
The global average sea level rose by an average of 1.8 mm per
year from 1961 to 2003. There is high confidence that the
rate of observed sea level rise increased from the 19th to the
20th century.
Average Arctic temperatures have increased at almost twice the
global average rate in the past 100 years.
Mountain glaciers and snow cover have declined on average in
both hemispheres. Widespread decreases in glaciers and ice caps
have contributed to sea-level rise.
• Long-term upward trends in the amount of precipitation have
been observed over many regions from 1900 to 2005.
To enable our understanding of climate change to develop,
significant quantities of data have been developed charting changes
to the Earth's climate over time. This has required an enormous
international co-operative effort over many years. It is only on
the basis of reliable, irrefutable evidence that decisions of an
international significance can take place. Decisions made now may
have far-reaching consequences for the populations of individual
288
11
BIODIVERSITY
Deforestation affects biodiversity in a number of ways. For example:
It directly reduces the number of trees present in an area.
If only a specific type of tree is felled, the species diversity is
reduced. For example, rosewood is often extracted from rainforests
(it is used in the manufacture of furniture and guitars), but less
useable trees may be left intact.
It reduces the number of animal species present in an area as it
destroys their habitat, including their food source and home. This
in turn reduces the number of other animal species that are
present, by reducing or removing their food source.
Animals are forced to migrate to other areas to ensure their survival.
This may result in the biodiversity of neighbouring areas increasing.
A Figure 2 This land is being cleared
to make space for housing. As well as
reducing biodiversity, burning the trees
increases carbon dioxide levels in
the atmosphere
In some areas forests are now being replaced. Although this helps to
restore biodiversity, generally only a few commercially viable tree
species are planted. Therefore, biodiversity is still significantly reduced
from its original level.
Agriculture
In general, farmers will only grow a few different species of crop
plants, or rear just a few species of animals. Farmers often select the
species based on characteristics that give a high yield (high levels of
production), for example, wheat that produces the most grain or dairy
cows that produce the most milk. The selection of only a few species
greatly reduces the biodiversity of the area.
In order to be economically viable, once the farmers have selected
their desired species, a number of techniques are used to produce as
many of the desired species as possible, maximising food production.
Unfortunately many of these techniques lead to a reduction in
biodiversity, for example:
Figure 3 This hedgerow supports
a large diversity of species. As well
as destroying the habitats of many
organisms, removing hedges or trees
causes soil erosion. Hedges act as
natural windbreaks. Once they are
removed, when the fields are left bare
during winter the soil can be blown or
washed away
Deforestation - to increase the area of land available for growing
crops or rearing animals.
Removal of hedgerows - as a result of mechanisation, farmers
remove hedgerows to enable them to use large machinery to help
them plant, fertilise, and harvest crops. It also frees up extra land
for crop growing. This reduces the number of plant species present
in an area and destroys the habitat of animals such as blackbirds,
hedgehogs, mice and many invertebrates.
Use of chemicals such as pesticides and herbicides. Pesticides are
used to kill pests that would eat the crops or live on the animals.
This reduces species diversity directly as it destroys the pest species
(normally insects), and indirectly by destroying the food source of
other organisms.
Herbicides are used to kill weeds. A weed is any plant growing
in an area where it is not wanted. Weeds are destroyed as
they compete with the cultivated plants for light, minerals, and
287
BIODIVERSITY
77
relative to their abundance in terms of their biomass or
productivity). They affect many other organisms in an ecosystem
and help to determine the species richness and evenness in the
community. When a keystone species is removed the habitat is
drastically changed. All other species are affected and some may
disappear altogether. It is therefore essential to protect keystone
species to maintain biodiversity. (See the Application for
examples of keystone species.)
Human activity versus biodiversity
We have discussed the negative impact humans have on biodiversity,
such as deforestation and clearing land for monoculture. However,
human activity also plays an important role in increasing biodiversity.
In many countries, including the UK, the natural habitat is created
by human intervention and the management of land. For example,
farming, grazing, planting of hedges, meadows, and forest management
have changed the landscapes, the habitats and the ecology over
thousands of years. Even the wildest of habitats, such as Dartmoor
and the Scottish mountains, are a result of farmers and landowners
managing the ecosystems.
One example is sheep grazing on downlands. This enables rare species
like the Glanville fritillary (an orange patterned butterfly) to survive.
By maintaining the grass at low levels it allows the plantains that the
caterpillars feed on to thrive and therefore maintains biodiversity.
Research has also shown that after annual controlled burning of
gorse and heather in the New Forest (an area of lowland heath),
biodiversity soars. If left to its own devices, bracken and pioneer tree
species such as pine and silver birch would start to dominate. Areas of
lowland heath worldwide are now rarer than rainforest and provide
habitats for rare UK bird and reptile species such as the nightjar and
sand lizard.
Keystone species
Sea stars, American alligators and prairie dogs are all
examples of key stone species:
Like many keystone species, sea stars are predators.
They maintain a balanced ecosystem by limiting the
population of other species. Sea stars eat mussels and
sea urchins, which have no other natural predators.
If the sea star is removed from the ecosystem, the
mussels undergo a population explosion, reducing the
number of other species present in an area (such as
barnacles and limpets) as they compete for space and
other resources. Similarly, if sea urchins are not eaten,
their growing population crowds coral reefs, preventing
other species from occupying the same area.
A Figure 2 Sea stars (Pisaster ochraceus) feeding on
mussels. Sea stars are keystone species in the intertidal
zones of the Pacific ocean
293
BIODIVERSITY
11
The IUCN was also involved in the establishment of the Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES). This treaty
regulates the international trade of wild plant and animal specimens and
their products. As the trade in wild animals and plants crosses borders
between countries, the effort to regulate it requires international
cooperation to safeguard certain species from over-exploitation. Today,
more than 35 000 species of animals and plants are protected by this
treaty.
The Rio Convention
In 1992, an historic meeting of 172 nations was held in Rio de Janeiro,
which became known as the Earth Summit. The summit resulted in
some new agreements between nations in the Rio Convention:
WWF
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) requires countries
to develop national strategies for sustainable development, thus
ensuring the maintenance of biodiversity.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) is an agreement between nations to take steps to
stabilise greenhouse gas concentrations within the atmosphere.
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
(UNCCD) aims to prevent the transformation of fertile land into
desert and reduce the effects of drought through programmes of
international cooperation.
Figure 7 A number of non-
governmental organisations exist whose
aim is to promote conservation and
sustainability. One example is the World
Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
Each convention contributes to maintaining biodiversity. They are
intrinsically linked, operating in many ecosystems and addressing
interdependent issues.
Countryside stewardship scheme
Many conservation schemes are set up at a more local level. An
example is the Countryside Stewardship Scheme in England.
The scheme, which operated from 1991-2014, offered governmental
payments to farmers and other land managers to enhance and
conserve the English landscape. Its general aim was to make
conservation a part of normal farming and land management practice.
Specific aims of the scheme included:
Summary questions
1 Describe three methods of ex
situ conservation. (3 marks)
• sustaining the beauty and diversity of the landscape
improving, extending and creating wildlife habitats
restoring neglected land and conserving archaeological and historic
features
. improving opportunities for countryside enjoyment.
This scheme has now been replaced by the Environmental
Stewardship Scheme, which operates similarly.
2 Discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of captive
breeding programmes.
(4 marks)
3 State and explain four
techniques used in the active
management of wildlife
reserves. (4 marks)
Explain why local and
international agreements can
help to preserve biodiversity.
(4 marks)
299
11.8 Methods of maintaining
biodiversity
Specification reference: 4.2.1
In the previous topics you have looked at the reasons why it is
important to maintain biodiversity, but how can this be achieved?
The obvious way is to stop converting wild land into agricultural
or building land. However, to cope with population growth this
conversion is sometimes unavoidable. It is also important that
scientists try to repair damage that has already been done, and
increase biodiversity.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ in situ and ex situ methods of
maintaining biodiversity
→ international and local
conservation agreements
made to protect species and
habitats.
Maintaining biodiversity
Conservation is the name given to the preservation and careful
management of the environment and of natural resources. By
conserving the natural habitat in an area, organisms' chances
of survival are maintained, allowing them to reproduce. As a
consequence species and genetic diversity can be safeguarded.
There are many different ways in which scientists try to conserve
biodiversity. They can be divided into two main categories:
•
in situ conservation - within the natural habitat
ex situ conservation - out of the natural habitat.
Scientists are currently trying to conserve a number of species to
prevent their extinction. Species are classified, for the purposes of
conservation, according to their abundance in the wild:
• extinct - no organisms of the species exist anywhere in the world
extinct in the wild - organisms of the species only exist in captivity
endangered - a species that is in danger of extinction
vulnerable -a species that is considered likely to become
endangered in the near future.
A Figure 1 The giant panda (Ailuropoda
melanoleuca) is an example of an
endangered species. Its numbers have
been severely reduced by loss of habitat
and poaching. Current estimates suggest
there are less than 2000 giant pandas
living in the wild
Non-threatened and categories of least concern follow below. Many
conservation techniques focus on increasing the numbers of organisms
from species that are classified as endangered.
Scientists also promote the practice of sustainable development -
economic development that meets the needs of people today, without
limiting the ability of future generations to meet their needs.
Synoptic link
In situ conservation
In situ conservation takes place inside an organism's natural habitat.
This maintains not only the genetic diversity of species, but also the
evolutionary adaptations that enable a species to adapt continually to
changing environmental conditions, such as changes in pest populations
or climate. By allowing the endangered species to interact with other
species, it also preserves the interdependent relationships present in
You will find more about sustainable
development in Topic 24.5,
Sustainability and about the ecology
of environmentally sensitive regions
in Topic 24.9, Environmentally
sensitive ecosystems.
295
11
BIODIVERSITY
60000
KEV:
55000
— total species assessed
--- total species threatened
total number of species
50000
45000
840000
35000
§ 30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
2000
2002
2004 2006
year
2008
2010
Simpson's index of diversity takes
into account both species richness
and species evenness. In a school
exercise book a student wrote the
following definitions:
Species richness is a measure of
the amount of species in an area
Species evenness shows how
many individuals there are of a
species in an area.
The teacher did not award a mark
for either of these statements.
Suggest how each statement could be
improved.
(2 marks)
(iii) if the value for Simpson's Index of
Diversity is high, this indicates that
the biodiversity of the habitat is high.
Outline the implications for a
habitat if the Simpson's Index
of Diversity is low. (2 marks)
when collecting data on the field trip, the
students placed quadrats in 15 locations
and calculated a mean number of plants
for each species.
Suggest two other steps they could
have taken to ensure that their value
for Simpson's Index of Diversity was as
accurate as possible.
(2 marks)
OCR F212/01 2013
b
7
(i) Using the graph, compare the
changes in the total number of
species assessed with the changes in
the total number of threatened species
over the 10 year period. (3 marks)
(ii) Using the graph, calculate the
percentage of species assessed that
were threatened with extinction
in 2010. Show your working. Give
your answer to the nearest whole
number.
(2 marks)
(iii) Suggest explanations for the shape
of the two curves between 2005
and 2010.
(2 marks)
C A study of the biodiversity of an area
considers not only the total number
of species but also the relative number
of individuals within each species.
State one relative factor that could be
taken into account when describing the
biodiversity of an area.
(1 mark)
d In any attempt to protect global diversity,
cooperation between countries is
important.
Two examples of such international
cooperation are:
Convention on International trade
in Endangered Species (CITES)
Rio Convention on Biological Diversity.
Other than the conservation of
biodiversity, state two aims for each
of these conventions.
(4 marks)
OCR F212/01 2013
Scientists have identified approximately
1.8 million different species. The number
of species that actually exist is likely to be
significantly higher than 1.8 million.
a Suggest two reasons why the number of
species identified is likely to be lower than
the actual number of species present on
Earth.
(2 marks)
Many organisations, such as the
International Union for the Conservation
of Nature (IUCN), gather annual data
about the number of species that are
known to exist and to what extent they
are considered to be endangered.
Figure I shows the total number of
species assessed by the IUCN over a
10 year period and the number of those
species assessed that are considered to
be threatened with extinction.
b
301
11
11.8 Methods of maintaining biodiversity
a habitat, therefore interlinked species may also be preserved. In situ
conservation is generally cheaper than ex situ conservation.
Marine (saltwater), aquatic (freshwater) and terrestrial (land) nature
reserves are examples of areas that have been specifically designated
for the conservation of wildlife.
Wildlife reserves
Once an area has been designated as a wildlife reserve, active
management is required. Active management techniques may include:
Figure 2 This is Wistman's Wood on
Dartmoor. It is a SSSI-a Site of Special
Scientific Interest. The UK has over 4000
conservation areas where habitats are
protected, covering around 8% of the
nation's land
controlled grazing - only allowing livestock to graze a particular
area of land for a certain period of time to allow species time to
recover, or keeping a controlled number of animals in a habitat to
maintain it (see below)
restricting human access – for example, not allowing people to
visit a beach during the seal reproductive season, or by providing
paths which must be followed to prevent plants being trampled
controlling poaching - this includes creating defences to prevent
access, issuing fines, or more drastic steps such as the removal of
rhino horns
. feeding animals - this technique can help to ensure more
organisms survive to reproductive age
• reintroduction of species - adding species to areas that have
become locally extinct, or whose numbers have decreased
significantly
culling or removal of invasive species - an invasive species
is an organism that is not native to an area and has negative
effects on the economy, environment, or health. These organisms
compete with native species for resources
halting succession - succession is a natural process in which
early colonising species are replaced over time until a stable
mature population is achieved. For example, as a result of natural
succession any piece of land left alone for long enough in the UK
will develop into woodland. The only way to protect some habitats
such as heath-, down- or moorland from becoming woodland
is through controlled grazing. In different parts of the country
ponies, deer, sheep, and cows eat tree seedlings as they appear,
preventing succession from heathland to scrubland to woodland.
This is an important role played by humans in maintaining some
of our most beautiful habitats for future generations.
Figure 3 This white rhinoceros is
having its horn removed in Umhlametsi
Private Nature Reserve, South Africa as
an anti-poaching measure. The horn is
highly desirable for its use in ornaments
and some traditional medicines
Marine conservation zones
Marine conservation zones are less well established than terrestrial
ones. Lundy Island is currently the only statutory marine reserve in
England, but there are many other protected areas.
A Figure 4 In Britain, the rhododendron
has taken over large areas, virtually
eliminating some native plants. Invasive
plants and animals are the second
greatest threat to biodiversity after
habitat loss
Marine reserves are vital in preserving species-rich areas such as coral
reefs, which are being devastated by non-sustainable fishing methods.
The purpose of the marine reserve is not to prevent fisherman from
visiting the entire area, but to create areas of refuge within which
296
BIODIVERSITY
11
Habitat biodiversity
Habitat biodiversity refers to the number of different habitats found
within an area. Each habitat can support a number of different species.
Therefore in general, the greater the habitat biodiversity, the greater
the species biodiversity will be within that area.
The UK is home to large number of habitat types, including meadow,
woodland, streams, and sand dunes. It has a large habitat biodiversity.
By contrast Antarctica, covered almost entirely by an ice sheet, has a
very low habitat biodiversity and very few species live in this region.
On a smaller scale, countryside that is habitat rich, perhaps with a
river, woodland, hedgerows and wild grassland, will be more species
rich than farmed countryside with large ploughed fields making up a
single uniform habitat.
Species biodiversity
Species biodiversity has two different components:
species richness - the number of different species living in a
particular area, and
species evenness - a comparison of the numbers of individuals
of each species living in a community. (The community is all the
populations of living organisms in a particular habitat.)
A Figure 3 These two butterflies
appear to belong to different species;
however, both are examples of the
Gaudy Commodore butterfly (Precis
octavia). Genetic biodiversity within
this species leads to different wing
patterns and colours. The actual colours
displayed depend on the season in
which the butterflies are born
Therefore an area can differ in its species biodiversity even if it has the
same number of species. For example, a cornfield and a grass meadow
may both contain 20 species. However, in the cornfield, corn will
make up 95% of the community with the remaining 5% made up of
other organisms including weed plants, insects, mice, and birds. In the
grass meadow the species will be more balanced in their populations.
Study tip
There are many key terms in this
topic - make sure you are clear
on their meaning. Why don't you
try making your own biodiversity
glossary?
Summary questions
Genetic biodiversity
Genetic biodiversity refers to the variety of genes that make up
a species. Humans have about 25000 genes, but some species of
flowering plants have as many as 400 000 genes. Many of these
genes are the same for all individuals within a species. However, for
many genes, different versions (alleles) exist. This leads to genetic
biodiversity within a species (you will learn more about genetic
biodiversity in Topic 11.5, Calculating genetic biodiversity).
Genetic biodiversity within a species can lead to quite different
characteristics being exhibited. For example, some genes are the same
for all breeds of dog - these genes define the organism as a dog. Some
of the genes have many alleles - they code for the wide variation in
characteristics seen between different breeds of dog, for example coat
colour and length.
1 State the difference between
species richness and
species evenness. (2 marks)
2 Compare the biodiversity of an
arid desert and a temperate
coastline.
(3 marks)
Greater genetic biodiversity within a species allows for better
adaptation to a changing environment, and is more likely to result in
individuals who are resistant to disease.
3 Suggest why greater genetic
biodiversity increases a
species' chances of long-term
survival.
(4 marks)
271
11.
BIODIVERSITY
From this sample, the scientist could tell that:
Loci W Y and Z were polymorphic
Loci V and X were not polymorphic
Calculate the proportion of polymorphic gene loci for this mountain ibex population.
1
2
3
Count the number of polymorphic gene loci: 3 (W, Y and Z)
Count the total number of loci: 5 (V, W, X, Y and Z)
Calculate the proportion of polymorphic gene loci:
proportion of polymorphic gene loci
number of polymorphic gene loci
total number of loci
Uw
= 0.6
4
The proportion of polymorphic gene loci is often expressed
as a percentage:
percentage of polymorphic gene loci
= proportion of polymorphic gene loci x 100
= 0.6 x 100
= 60%
285
11.6 Factors affecting
biodiversity
Specification reference: 4.2.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the factors affecting
biodiversity, including human
population growth, agriculture
and climate change.
Maintaining biodiversity is essential for preserving a balanced
ecosystem for all organisms. As species are interconnected within an
ecosystem, the removal of one species can have a profound effect on
others. For example, it could lead to a loss of another species' food
source or shelter.
As part of the human population you rely on biodiversity for many
of the materials you need to survive, such as food, wood, and oxygen.
However, humans are the leading cause of loss of biodiversity.
Human influence on biodiversity
The human population is growing at a dramatic rate. There are
now over seven billion people living in the world, over double the
number alive in the 1960s and over seven times more than in 1800.
This increasing growth rate is linked to improvements in medicine,
hygiene, housing, and infrastructure, which enable people to live for
longer.
To create enough space for housing, industry, and farming to support
the increasing population, humans are severely disrupting the ecology
of many areas. The main problems are occurring as a result of:
Figure 1 This photo shows a
remnant of rainforest surrounded by
farmland near Iguacu National Park in
Brazil. Rainforests are being destroyed
at a rapid pace. Almost 90% of West
Africa's rainforest has been destroyed
and the island of Madagascar has
lost two thirds of its original rainforest
since humans arrived 2000 years ago.
Removal of tropical rainforests causes
the greatest loss of global biodiversity -
even though rainforests cover less
than 10% of the Earth's surface, they
contain approximately 80% of the world's
documented species
. deforestation - the permanent removal of large areas of forest
to provide wood for building and fuel (known as logging), and to
create space for roads, building and agriculture.
agriculture - an increasing amount of land has to be farmed in
order to feed the growing population. This has resulted in large
amounts of land being cleared and in many cases planted with a
single crop (monoculture).
climate change – there is much evidence that the release of
carbon dioxide and other pollutants into the atmosphere from the
burning of fossil fuels is increasing global temperatures.
Other forms of pollution result from industry and agriculture, such as
the chemical pollution of waterways. The improper disposal of waste
and packaging is a form of environmental pollution called littering.
Deforestation
Deforestation can occur naturally, for example as a result of forest fires
caused by lightning or extreme heat and dry weather. However, most
deforestation now occurs deliberately as a result of human action.
Some areas of forest have also been destroyed indirectly by humans
through acid rain, which forms as a result of pollutants being released
into the atmosphere.
286
11.2 Types of sampling
Specification reference: 4.2.1
You can use a variety of techniques to measure and compare the
biodiversity of different habitats. However, it is often impossible to
count or measure all of the organisms present in an area, so sampling
techniques are used.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how sampling is used in
measuring the biodiversity of
a habitat and the importance
of sampling
→ random and non-random
sampling
the importance of sampling
the range of organisms in a
habitat.
What is sampling?
Sampling means taking measurements of a limited number of
individual organisms present in a particular area.
Sampling can be used to estimate the number of organisms in an area
without having to count them all. The number of individuals of a
species present in an area is known as the abundance of the organism.
->
Sampling can also be used to measure a particular characteristic of an
organism. For example, you cannot reliably determine the height of
wheat by measuring one wheat plant in a farmer's field. However, if you
measure the height of a number of plants and then calculate an average,
your result is likely to be close to the average height of the entire crop.
After measuring a sample, you can use the results of the sample to make
generalisations or estimates about the number of organisms, distribution
of species or measured characteristic throughout the entire habitat.
Sampling can be done in two ways - random and non-random.
Random sampling
Random sampling means selecting individuals by chance. In a
random sample, each individual in the population has an equal
likelihood of selection, rather like picking names out of a hat.
To decide which organisms to study, random number tables or
computers can be used. You have no involvement in deciding which
organisms to investigate. For example, to take a random sample at a
grass verge you could follow these steps:
1 Mark out a grid on the grass using two tape measures laid at
right angles.
Use random numbers to determine the x coordinate and the
y coordinate on your grid.
3 Take a sample at each of the coordinate pairs generated.
Non-random sampling
Non-random sampling is an alternative sampling method where
the sample is not chosen at random. It can be divided into three main
techniques:
A Figure 1 This scientist is taking
random soil samples in a field
Opportunistic - this is the weakest form of sampling as it may
not be representative of the population. Opportunistic sampling
uses organisms that are conveniently available.
272
11
11.8 Methods of maintaining biodiversity
Captive breeding programmes provide the animals with shelter, an
abundant supply of nutritious food, an absence of predators and
veterinary treatment. Suitable breeding partners or semen (which can
be used to artificially inseminate females) can be imported from other
zoos iſ not available within the zoo's own population.
A Figure 6 These critically endangered
Western lowland gorillas (Gorilla gorilla
gorilla) are part of a New York Zoo
captive breeding programme. Although
far more invertebrates than vertebrates
face extinction, most captive breeding
programmes focus on vertebrates
as people find it easier to relate to,
and have sympathy with vertebrates.
This generates financial support for
their conservation and extends public
education to wider issues
Maintaining genetic diversity within a captive breeding population
can be difficult. As only a small number of breeding partners are
available, problems related to inbreeding can occur. To overcome this,
an international catalogue is maintained, detailing genealogical data
on individuals. Mating can thus be arranged to ensure that genetic
diversity is maximised. Techniques such as artificial insemination,
embryo transfer and long-term cryogenic storage of embryos allow
new genetic lines to be introduced without having to transport the
adults to new locations, and do not require the animals' cooperation.
Some organisms born in captivity may not be suitable for release in
the wild. These are some of the reasons:
• Diseases - there may be a loss of resistance to local diseases in
captive-bred populations. Also, new diseases might exist in the
wild, to which captive animals have yet to develop resistance.
Behaviour - some behaviour is innate, but much has to be
learned through copying or experience. In an early case of
reintroduction, a number of monkeys starved because they
had no concept of having to search for food - they had become
domesticated. Now food is hidden in cages, rather than just
supplied, so that the animals learn to look for it.
Genetic races - the genetic make-up of captive animals can
become so different from the original population that the two
populations cannot interbreed.
Habitat - in many cases the natural habitat must first be restored
to allow captive populations to be reintroduced. If only a small
suitable habitat exists it is likely that there are already as many
individuals as the habitat can support. The introduction of new
individuals can lead to stress and tension as individuals fight for
limited territory and resources such as food.
Conservation agreements
To conserve biodiversity successfully, local, and international
cooperation is required to ensure habitats and individual species are
preserved. Animals do not respect a country's boundaries. Therefore,
to increase the chances of a species' survival, cross-border protections
should be offered.
International Union for the Conservation of Nature
Intergovernmental organisations, such as the International Union
for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), assist in securing agreements
between nations. At least once a year the IUCN publishes the Red
List, detailing the current conservation status of threatened animals.
Countries can then work together to conserve these species.
298
11
11.5 Calculating genetic biodiversity
Summary questions
allele. For example, different alleles exist for the immunoglobulin
gene, which plays a role in determining human blood type - this is
therefore defined as a polymorphic gene. The three alleles are:
1 Describe how genetic
biodiversity in a population
can increase. (2 marks)
2 Explain why it is advantageous
for a species to be genetically
biodiverse.
orks)
• 14 – resulting in the production of antigen A
IP – resulting in the production of antigen B
• 1° – resulting in the production of neither antigen
Most genes are not polymorphic. These genes are said to be
monomorphic - a single allele exists for this gene. This ensures that
the basic structure of individuals within a species remains consistent.
The proportion of genes that are polymorphic can be measured using
the formula:
: number of polymorphic gene loci
proportion of polymorphic gene loci =
total number of loci
(The locus (plural - loci) of a gene refers to the position of the gene on
a chromosome.)
A scientist was
V studying two species of
Drosophila (flies).
DNA was extracted from each
species and 25 gene loci
compared.
For species A, 12 of the loci
studied were polymorphic.
For species B, 15 loci were
polymorphic.
Use the data collected to
explain which of the species
was more genetically diverse.
(4 marks)
The greater the proportion of polymorphic gene loci, the greater the
genetic biodiversity within the population.
9 Worked example: Measuring genetic biodiversity
Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate fragments of DNA,
DNA samples
based on their size. In this technique restriction enzymes are used
negative electrode - I
to cut DNA into smaller pieces, which are then placed in a gel. The
sample well in gel is placed between positive and negative electrodes, which cause
the negatively charged DNA to move towards the positive side. The
gel-
smaller the fragment of DNA, the further the movement through the
gel. The pattern produced, known as a banding pattern, can be used
to compare DNA samples from different individuals.
The following section of data was collected from the gel
electrophoresis of five genetic loci within 20 individuals in an ibex
positive electrode
(mountain goat) population. The five loci studied were labelled V, W,
large fragments
X, Y, and Z.
direction of
migration
All IL TIL
TILL III IC
gel
-U
1
2
3
4
individuals
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
DDDDDDDDDDDDDDD
20
small fragments
locus V
I
locus W
—
locus X -> DDDDDDDDD
DDDDD00
locus Y -
IIIII
DODOO
JOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
locus Z ->Lagoog
O
284
BIODIVERSITY
11.1 Biodiversity
Specification reference: 4.2.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how biodiversity may be
considered at different levels.
You may be familiar with the term biodiversity - the variety of living
organisms present in an area. Biodiversity includes plants, animals,
fungi, and other living things. In fact, it includes everything from
gigantic redwood trees to single-celled algae.
The importance of biodiversity
Biodiversity is essential in maintaining a balanced ecosystem for all
organisms. All species are interconnected - they depend on one another.
For example, trees provide homes for animals. Animals eat plants,
which in turn need fertile soil to grow. Fungi and other microorganisms
help decompose dead plants and animals, returning nutrients to the
soil. In regions of reduced biodiversity, these connections may not all be
present, which eventually harms all species in the ecosystem.
We rely on balanced ecosystems as they provide us with the food,
oxygen and other materials we need to survive. Unfortunately, many
human activities, such as farming and clearing land for housing, can
lead to a reduction in biodiversity.
A Figure 1 Coral reefs are amongst
the most biodiverse ecosystems on
the planet
Measuring biodiversity
Tropical, moist regions (that are warm all year round) have the most
biodiversity. The UK's temperate climate (warm summers and cold
winters) has less biodiversity. Very cold areas such as the Arctic, or
very dry areas such as deserts, have the least biodiversity. Generally,
the closer a region is to the Equator (the line of latitude of the Earth,
halfway between the North Pole and South Pole), the greater the
biodiversity. For example, over 40 000 plant species live in the Amazon
rainforest, whereas less than 3000 live in Northern Canada.
A Figure 2 There is very little
biodiversity at the top of a high mountain
Measuring biodiversity plays an important role in conservation. It
informs scientists of the species that are present, thus providing a
baseline for the level of biodiversity in an area. From this information,
the effect of any changes to an environment can be measured. These
may include the effect of human activity, disease or climate change,
for example.
Before a major project is undertaken, such as building a new road or the
creation of a new nature reserve, an Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) is undertaken. This assessment attempts to predict the positive
and negative effects of a project on the biodiversity in that area.
Biodiversity can be studied at different levels:
habitat biodiversity
• species biodiversity
genetic biodiversity.
270
BIODIVERSITY
11.
A Figure 1 Gloucester Old Spot pig
advantageous characteristics and bred. For example, the breeding
of pedigree animals or of human food crops
captive breeding programmes in zoos and conservation centres,
where only a small number of captive individuals of a species are
available for breeding. Often the wild population is endangered
or extinct
rare breeds, where selective breeding has been used historically
to produce a breed of domestic animal or plant with characteristics
which then become less popular or unfashionable, so the numbers
of the breed fall catastrophically. When only a small number
of individuals of a breed remain and are available for breeding,
and all of these animals will have been selected for the specific
breed traits, the genetic diversity of the remaining population
will be low. This can cause serious problems when trying to
restore numbers yet maintain breed characteristics, for example, a
Gloucester Old Spot pig must have at least one spot on the body to
be accepted into the registry of this rare breed
artificial cloning (asexual reproduction), for example using
cuttings to clone a farmed plant
natural selection. As a result, species will evolve to contain
primarily the alleles which code for advantageous characteristics.
Over time, alleles coding for less advantageous characteristics will
be lost from a population, or only remain in a few individuals.
genetic bottlenecks, where few individuals within a population
survive an event or change (e.g., disease, environmental change or
habitat destruction), thus reducing the 'gene pool'. Only the alleles
of the surviving members of the population are available to be
passed on to offspring
the founder effect, where a small number of individuals create
a new colony, geographically isolated from the original. The gene
pool for this new population is small.
genetic drift, due to the random nature of alleles being passed on
from parents to their offspring, the frequency of occurrence of an
allele will vary. In some cases, the existence of a particular allele
can disappear from a population altogether. Genetic drift is more
pronounced in populations with a low genetic biodiversity.
Synoptic link
An example of the founder effect
is given in Topic 10.8, Changing
population characteristics. You
will learn more about genetic
bottlenecks and the founder
effect in Chapter 20, Patterns of
inheritance and variation.
Synoptic link
You will find out about how
polymorphic genes, and in
particular your blood type, are
inherited in Chapter 20, Patterns of
inheritance and variation.
0000
Measuring genetic biodiversity
One way in which scientists quantify genetic biodiversity is by
measuring polymorphism. Polymorphic genes have more than one
Figure 2 The effect of genetic drift on
genetic biodiversity can be shown using
the 'marbles in a jar' analogy. At each
generation, the random nature of alleles
being passed on leads to a change in
the frequency of the alleles present in
the population. In this case, by the fifth
generation the purple allele is removed
from the population altogether
283
BIODIVERSITY
17
populations can build up and repopulate adjacent areas. Large areas of
sea are required for marine reserves as the target species often move
large distances, or breed in geographically different areas.
Synoptic link
You will find more about succession
in Topic 23.4, Succession.
Ex situ conservation
Ex situ conservation involves the removal of organisms from their
natural habitat. It is normally used in addition to in situ measures,
ensuring the survival of a species.
Botanic gardens
Plant species can be grown successfully in botanic gardens. Here the
species are actively managed to provide them with the best resources
to grow, such as the provision of soil nutrients, sufficient watering, and
the removal or prevention of pests.
There are roughly 1500 botanic gardens worldwide, holding 35 000
plant species. Although this is a significant number (more than 10%
of the world's flora), the majority of species are not conserved. Many
wild relatives of selectively bred crop species are under-represented
amongst the conserved species. These wild species are a potential
source of genes, conferring resistance to diseases, pests, and parasites.
Seed banks
A seed bank is an example of a gene bank - a store of genetic material.
Seeds are carefully stored so that new plants may be grown in the
future. They are dried and stored at temperatures of -20°C to maintain
their viability, by slowing down the rate at which they lose their ability
to germinate. Almost all temperate seeds, and many tropical seeds, can
be stored in this way. Scientists expect that they will remain viable for
centuries, providing a back-up against the extinction of wild plants. The
Svalbard 'Doomsday Vault' in Norway stores seeds in the permafrost and
already houses around 800 000 species. It will eventually have 3 million
different types of seeds and aims to provide a back-up against the
extinction of plants in the wild by storing seeds for future reintroduction
and research, for breeding and for genetic engineering in the future.
Seed banks don't work for all plants. Some seeds die when dried and
frozen, and sadly the seeds of most tropical rainforest trees fall into
this category.
Captive breeding programmes
Captive breeding programmes produce offspring of species in a
human-controlled environment. These are often run and managed
by zoos and aquatic centres. For example, The National Marine
Aquarium in South West England is playing an important role in
the conservation of sea horse species. Several species are now solely
represented by animals in captivity.
Scientists working on captive breeding programmes aim to create a
stable, healthy population of a species, and then gradually reintroduce
the species back into its natural habitat. The Arabian Oryx is an example
of a species that was extinct in the wild before its reintroduction.
Figure 5 The Millennium Seed Bank
Project at Kew Gardens contains over a
billion seeds from over 34 000 species
in underground frozen vaults. It is the
world's largest collection of seeds and
aims to provide a back-up against the
extinction of plants in the wild by storing
seeds for future use
297
11.4 Calculating biodiversity
Specification reference: 4.2.1
Ecologists, such as those working for the Environment Agency,
often perform calculations using specific formulae to determine the
biodiversity of an area. One such calculation is a measure of the
species diversity. The diversity of the organisms present in an area
is normally proportional to the stability of the ecosystem, so the
greater the species diversity the greater the stability. The most stable
communities have large numbers of fairly evenly distributed species,
in good-sized populations.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the use and interpretation
of Simpson's Index of
Diversity (D) to calculate the
biodiversity of a habitat.
Pollution often reduces biodiversity. As a result of harsh conditions, a
few species tend to dominate. If corrective steps are taken to improve
environmental conditions, biodiversity levels usually increase.
Monitoring biodiversity is therefore a useful tool in successful
conservation and environmental management.
How to calculate biodiversity
The simplest way to measure biodiversity is to count up the number of
species present - the species richness. However, this measure does not
take into account the number of individuals present. Therefore in a
meadow containing two daisies and 1000 buttercups, the daisies have
as much influence on the richness of the area as 1000 buttercups. A
community dominated by one or two species is considered to be less
diverse than one in which several different species have a similar
abundance.
Synoptic link
You learnt about species richness
and species evenness in Topic 11.1,
Biodiversity.
Simpson's Index of Diversity (D) is a better measure of biodiversity
as it takes into account both species richness, and species evenness.
It is calculated using the formula:
D=1-
where:
0)
= sum of (total)
N = the total number of organisms of all species and
n= the total number of organisms of a particular species.
When using a technique such as Simpson's Index of Diversity,
scientists normally have to estimate population size using a variety
of sampling techniques, such as using a quadrat to estimate the
population of a plant species in an area.
Simpson's Index of Diversity always results in a value between 0
and 1, where 0 represents no diversity and a value of 1 represents
infinite diversity. The higher the value of Simpson's Index of Diversity,
the more diverse the habitat.
Study tip
Be careful not to confuse species
diversity with species richness.
Species diversity takes into
account both the number of
different species present (species
richness) and the number of
individuals of each species.
279
BIODIVERSITY
77
Stratified - some populations can be divided into a number
of strata (sub-groups) based on a particular characteristic.
For instance, the population might be separated into males
and females. A random sample is then taken from each of these
strata proportional to its size.
Systematic – in systematic sampling different areas within an
overall habitat are identified, which are then sampled separately.
For example, systematic sampling may be used to study how
plant species change as you move inland from the sea. Systematic
sampling is often carried out using a line or a belt transect. A
line transect involves marking a line along the ground between
two poles and taking samples at specified points, this can include
describing all of the organisms which touch the line or distances of
samples from the line. A belt transect provides more information;
two parallel lines are marked, and samples are taken of the area
between the two lines.
A Figure 2 These students are carrying
out sampling by combining two different
methods. The quadrat seen here is being
used along a line transect. This is known
as an interrupted belt transect. This is
an example of systematic sampling
Reliability
A sample is never entirely representative of the organisms present in a
habitat. This may be due to the following:
Sampling bias - the selection process may be biased. This may
be by accident, or may occur deliberately. For example, you may
choose to sample a particular area that has more flowers because it
looks interesting. The effects of sampling bias can be reduced using
random sampling, where human involvement in choosing the
samples is removed.
Chance - the organisms selected may, by chance, not be
representative of the whole population. For example, a sample
of five worms collected in a trap may be the five longest in the
habitat. Chance can never be completely removed from the
process, but its effect can be minimised by using a large sample
size. The greater the number of individuals studied, the lower the
probability that chance will influence the result. Therefore the
larger the sample size, the more reliable the result.
Summary questions &
1 State the difference between random and non-random
sampling.
(1 mark)
Describe how you can increase the likelihood of a
sample being a reliable representation of the population
as a whole.
(4 marks)
3 State and explain which type of sampling you would
use to study:
a how organisms differ throughout the length of a stream
b the distribution of organisms on a school field.
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
273
11.3 Sampling techniques
Specification reference: 4.2.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ practical investigations
collecting random and non-
random samples in the field
how to measure species
richness and species
evenness in a habitat.
You can use many different techniques to sample the living organisms
present in a habitat and the environment in which they live, as you
saw in the previous topic. The technique you choose is dependent
on the information you require. At each sampling point you would
normally use more than one technique, so that a range of data can
be collected.
Sampling animals
The following techniques can be used to collect living animals for
study later. Remember, all living organisms must be handled carefully
and for as short a time period as possible. As soon as any sample
animals have been identified, counted and measured if required, they
must be released back into the habitat at the point they were collected.
A pooter is used to catch small insects. By sucking on a
mouthpiece, insects are drawn into the holding chamber via the
inlet tube. A filter before the mouthpiece prevents them from
being sucked into the mouth.
Sweep nets are used to catch insects in areas of long grass.
Pitfall traps are used to catch small, crawling invertebrates such
A Figure 1 This student is using a
as beetles, spiders and slugs. A hole is dug in the ground, which
pooter to collect insects from a tree
insects fall into. It must be deep enough that they
cannot crawl out and covered with a rool-structure
propped above so that the trap does not fill with
rainwater. The traps are normally left overnight, so
that nocturnal species are also sampled.
Tree beating is used to take samples of the
invertebrates living in a tree or bush. A large
white cloth is stretched out under the tree.
The tree is shaken or beaten to dislodge the
invertebrates. The animals will fall onto the sheet
where they can be collected and studied.
Kick sampling is used to study the organisms
living in a river. The river bank and bed is kicked'
for a period of time to disturb the substrate. A net
is held just downstream for a set period of time in
A Figure 2 This is a pitfall trap. The glass perspex cover
prevents rain entering the trap and potentially causing any
order to capture any organisms released into the
trapped insects to drown
flowing water.
Sampling plants
Plants are normally sampled using a quadrat, which can also be used
to pinpoint an area in which the sample of plants should be collected.
Quadrats can also be used to sample slow-moving animals such as
limpets, barnacles, mussels, and sea anemones.
274
11
11.4 Calculating biodiversity
Biodiversity values
What do low and high biodiversity values tell us about a habitat?
Table 1 Typical habitat features for environments with low and high biodiversity
Habitat features
High biodiversity
Low biodiversity
relatively few
number of successful species
nature of the environment
a large number
relatively benign/not stressful, with
more ecological niches
many species live in the habitat, often
with few specific adaptations to the
environment
stressful and/or extreme with
relatively few ecological niches
relatively few species live in the
habitat, often with very specific
adaptations for the environment
adaptation of species to environment
type of food webs
relatively simple
complex
major effects on the ecosystem
often relatively small effect
effect of a change to the environment
on ecosystem as a whole
Although some habitats of low biodiversity are unable to support a
large species diversity, those organisms that are present in the habitat
can be highly adapted to the extreme environment of the habitat.
These organisms may not survive elsewhere. It is therefore important
to conserve some habitats with low biodiversity, as well as those with
high biodiversity, in order to conserve rare species that may be too
specialised to survive elsewhere.
Figure 1 A habitat with a low
biodiversity value
0 0 Worked example: Calculating Simpson's Index
of Diversity
Individuals of the species living in a pond habitat were identified
and counted (Table 2). They were sampled by sweeping a net
through the pond.
Table 2 Species identified in a pond
Species
Number
water boatman
water strider
dragonfly larvae
mayfly larvae
caddisfly larvae
2
Calculate Simpson's Index of Diversity for this habitat.
Use the following formula:
D=1- ()
280
11
11.3 Sampling techniques
a decaying log. Of these, 20 are woodlice, 15 are spiders, and 15 are
centipedes – the community is quite evenly distributed between
species. However, if the 50 insects comprised just 45 woodlice and
5 spiders, the community would be described as uneven.
Synoptic link
Using frame quadrats
A frame quadrat is used to sample the population of plants living in a
habitat. There are three main ways of doing this:
You will learn how to use the
Lincoln index to estimate
population size in Topic 23.5,
Measuring the distribution and
abundance of organisms.
Density – if individual large plants can be seen clearly, count the
number of them in a lm by Im square quadrat. This will give you
the density per square metre. This is an absolute measure, not an
estimate as the following two methods.
Frequency - this is used where individual members of a species
are hard to count, like grass or moss. Using the small grids within a
quadrat, count the number of squares a particular species is present
in. For example, if clover is present in 65 out of 100 squares, the
frequency of its occurrence is 65%. (Each square represents 1%.)
Another commonly used quadrat contains 25 squares - in this case,
each square represents 4% of the study area. Therefore if, during a
sampling of grassland, eight quadrat squares contained buttercups,
the frequency of occurrence would be 32%.
Percentage cover - this is used for speed as lots of data can be
collected quickly. It is useful when a particular species is abundant
or difficult to count. It is an estimate by eye of the area within a
quadrat that a particular plant species covers.
For each approach, samples should be taken at a number of different
points. The larger the number of samples taken, the more reliable
your results. You should then calculate the mean of the individual
quadrat results to get an average value for a particular organism per m²
(To calculate the mean value, sum the individual quadrat results,
then divide by the number of samples taken). To work out the total
population of an organism in an area that has been sampled, multiply
the mean value per m2 by the total area.
Estimating animal population size
As animals are constantly moving through a habitat
and others may be hidden, it can be difficult to
accurately determine their population size. A technique
known as capture-mark-release-recapture is often used
to estimate a population size. This involves capturing
as many individuals of a species in an area as possible.
The organisms are marked and then released back into
the community. Time is allowed for the organisms to
redistribute themselves throughout the habitat before
another sample of animals is collected. By comparing
the number of marked individuals with the number of
unmarked individuals in the second sample, scientists
can estimate population size. The greater the number
of marked individuals recaptured, the smaller the
population.
A Figure 5 An electronic tag is being fitted to this green
sea turtle (Chelonia mydas). This is as part of a study to
estimate population size
276
11.5 Calculating genetic
biodiversity
Specification reference: 4.2.1
Maintaining genetic biodiversity is essential to the survival of a
species. In isolated populations, such as those present within a captive
breeding programme, genetic biodiversity is often reduced. This means
that the individuals may suffer from a range of problems associated
with in-breeding.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how genetic biodiversity may
be assessed, for example
by the calculation of the
percentage of gene variants
(alleles) in a genome
factors affecting genetic
biodiversity in isolated
populations.
Scientists can calculate the genetic biodiversity of a population of a
species (sometimes referred to as the gene pool) to monitor the health
of the population and ensure its long-term survival.
The importance of genetic biodiversity
Within a species, individuals have very little variation within their DNA.
All members of the species share the same genes. However, they
may have different versions of some of these genes. The different
'versions' of genes are called alleles. The differences in the alleles
among individuals of a species creates genetic biodiversity within
the species, or within a population of the species. The more alleles
present in a population, the more genetically biodiverse the
population.
Synoptic link
You learnt about alleles of genes
in Topics 6.3, Meiosis and 10.5,
Types of variation.
Species that contain greater genetic biodiversity are likely to be
able to adapt to changes in their environment, and hence are less
likely to become extinct. This is because there are likely to be
some organisms within the population that carry an advantageous
allele, which enables them to survive in the altered conditions.
For example, when a potentially fatal new disease is introduced to
a population, all organisms will be killed unless individuals carry
resistance to the disease. Those organisms are likely to survive the
disease, and therefore be able to reproduce - leading to the survival
of the species.
Factors that affect genetic biodiversity
For genetic biodiversity to increase, the number of possible alleles in a
population must also increase. This can occur through:
• mutation(s) in the DNA of an organism, creating a new allele.
• interbreeding between different populations. When an individual
migrates from one population and breeds with a member of
another population, alleles are transferred between the two
populations. This is known as gene flow.
In order for genetic biodiversity to decrease, the number of possible
alleles in a population must also decrease. This can occur through:
Synoptic link
You learnt about how genetic
diversity can lead to the evolution
of a species in Topic 10.8, Changing
population characteristics.
selective breeding (also known as artificial selection), where
only a few individuals within a population are selected for their
282
BIODIVERSITY
11.
1
Calculate total number of organisms (N)
N = 4 + 6 + 3 + 8 + 2 = 23
2
Calculate () for each organism. For example, for the water
boatman:
n = number of organisms = 4
N = total number of organisms = 23
6) = 6) = 0.03
3 Sum () for all organisms
4
6) = 0.03 +0.07 +0.02 + 0.12 + 0.01 = 0.25
Calculate Simpson's Index of Diversity
D=1- EC) = 1 - 0.25 = 0.75
A Figure 2 Ecologist studying
biodiversity in a pond habitat
This indicates that the pond habitat has a relatively
high biodiversity.
Summary questions
1 Describe the conditions likely to be found in an area of
high biodiversity.
(3 marks)
Figure 3 Pollution reduces
biodiversity in a habitat. These trees
have been killed by acid rain
The organisms present in two pond habitats were sampled. The
following values of Simpson's Index of Diversity were calculated:
Pond A: D = 0.27
Pond B:D=0.63
a Which pond habitat is the more biodiverse?
(1 mark)
b Which pond habitat is most likely to be polluted?
Explain your answer.
(3 marks)
3
A sample was taken of wildflowers growing in a meadow.
Calculate Simpson's Index of Diversity for this habitat. (4 marks)
Species
Number
Bird's-foot trefoil
Crested dog's-tail
Meadow buttercup
Oxeye daisy
Rough hawkbit
Smaller cat's-tail
7
2
281
BIODIVERSITY
There are two main types of quadrat:
Point quadrat - this consists of a frame containing a horizontal
bar. At set intervals along the bar, long pins can be pushed through
the bar to reach the ground. Each species of plant the pin touches
is recorded (Figure 3).
+0.5 metre (internal dimension) +
pin - placed through
hole in the horizontal bar -
through
wing nut -
$2
vertical leg
wire or string metal or wooden
frame
Figure 4 A frame quadrat
1:
00:00.0
surface view of horizontal bar
RooOQQOOOOO
holes through which the pin
wing nut
is successively dropped
Figure 3 A point quadrat
Frame quadrat - this consists of a square frame divided into a grid
of equal sections. The type and number of species within each section
of the quadrat is recorded (Figure 4). Further details are given below.
To collect the most valid representative sample of an area, quadrats
should be used following a random sampling technique (as discussed
in Topic 11.2, Types of sampling). To study how the presence and
distribution of organisms across an area of land varies, the quadrats
can be placed systematically along a line or belt transect.
Measuring species richness
As you learnt in Topic 11.1, Biodiversity species richness is a
measure of the number of different species living in a specific area.
You should use a combination of the techniques described above to
try to identify all the species present in a habitat. A list should be
compiled of each species identified. The total number of species can
then be calculated.
To enable scientists to accurately identify organisms, identification
keys are often used. These may contain images to identify the
organism, or a series of questions, which classify an organism into a
particular species based on the presence of a number of identifiable
characteristics.
Synoptic link
Measuring species evenness
As you learnt in Topic 11.1, Biodiversity, species evenness refers
to how close in numbers the populations of each species in an
environment are. For example, 50 organisms are found living under
You learned about how organisms
are classified in Topic 10.1,
Classification and 10.2, The five
kingdoms.
275
