10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
4
Data for both species are provided in Table 2
colour
Adaptations are characteristics which
increase an organism's chance of survival and
reproduction in an environment.
a State the difference between a behavioural
and a physiological adaptation. (1 mark)
b Marram grass is commonly found on sand
dunes around the coast of Great Britain.
species
mean mean range of
body wingspan echolocation
mass (g) (m) (kHz)
Common
5.5 0.22 | 42-47
pipistrelle
Soprano
5.5 0.21 52-60
pipistrelle
medium to
dark brown
medium to
dark brown
State and explain three anatomical
adaptations which enable this plant to
survive in an environment with little
access to water.
(3 marks)
Anatomical adaptations provide evidence
for convergent evolution. Explain what is
meant by the term 'convergent evolution'.
(2 marks)
OCR F212/01 2013
b (i) Name the genus to which the
soprano pipistrelle belongs (1 mark)
(ii) Using the data in Table 2, suggest
why pipistrelles were originally
classified as one species. (1 mark)
(iv) Describe how it is possible to confirm,
over a longer period of time, whether
two organisms belong to different
species or the same species. (2 marks)
The soprano pipistrelle has an
echolocation call that is 'high pitched'
(between 52 and 60 kHz). The common
pipistrelle has an echolocation call that is
low pitched' (between 42 and 47 kHz).
Variation within and between species can
be a result of genetic or environmental
factors. Whatever the causes of variation,
the type of variation displayed can occur
in two different forms.
Using the pipistrelle as an example,
describe the key features of both forms of
variation.
(7 marks)
OCR F212/01 2012
Bats are the only mammals that can truly
fly. Many species of bat hunt flying insects
at night. Bats are able to use sound waves
(echolocation) in order to help them find
their prey in the dark.
a Suggest how the ability to use
echolocation may have evolved from an
ancestor that did not have that ability
(4 marks)
The pipistrelle is the most common species of
bat in Europe. It was originally thought that
all pipistrelles belonged to the same species,
Pipistrellus pipistrellus. However, in the 1990s,
it was decided that there were two species:
the common pipistrelle, Pipistrellus pipistrellus
and the soprano pipistrelle, Pipistrellus
Pygmaeus.
269
10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
Physiological adaptations
Some examples of physiological adaptations:
Poison production - many reptiles produce venom to kill their
prey and many plants produce poisons in their leaves to protect
themselves from being eaten.
Antibiotic production - some bacteria produce antibiotics to kill
other species of bacteria in the surrounding area.
Water holding - the water-holding frog (Cyclorana platycephala) can
store water in its body. This allows it to survive in the desert for
more than a year without access to water. Many cacti and other
desert plants can hold large amounts of water in their tissues.
Figure 5 Aestivation is the name
given to a period of inactivity in hot, dry
places. The land snails aestivate to cope
with periods of extreme dry heat. This
is a combination of physiological and
behavioural adaptations
Many other examples are less unusual, and include reflexes, blinking
and temperature regulation.
Synoptic link
Anatomical adaptations provide evidence for
convergent evolution
Analogous structures
Although the tail fins of a whale and a fish perform the same role,
when you look at them in detail their structures are very different.
These are known as analogous structures - they have adapted to
perform the same function but have a different genetic origin.
You will learn more about the
adaptations of ectotherms and
endotherms to temperature in
Topics 15.2 and 15.3, respectively.
Convergent evolution takes place when unrelated species begin to
share similar traits. These similarities evolve because the organisms adapt
to similar environments or other selection pressures (for an explanation
of the term 'selection pressure', Topic 10.8, Changing population
characteristics). The organisms live in a similar way to each other. Using
our example of whales and fish, their similar characteristics have evolved
over time to allow the organisms to move efficiently through water.
Marsupials in Australia and placental mammals in the Americas are an
example of convergent evolution. Species in each continent resemble
each other because they have adapted to fill similar niches.
In placental mammals, a placenta connects the embryo to its mother's
circulatory system in the uterus. This nourishes the embryo, allowing
it to reach a high level of maturity before birth. Marsupials also start
life in the uterus, but then leave and enter the marsupium (pouch)
while they are still embryos. They complete their development here
by suckling milk.
These two subclasses of mammals separated from a common
ancestor more than 100 million years ago. Each lineage then
evolved independently. Despite this large temporal and geographical
separation, marsupials in Australia and placental mammals in
North America have produced varieties of species that bear a strong
resemblance in overall shape, type of locomotion and feeding
techniques. This is because they have adapted to similar climates
and food supplies. However, these organisms have very different
methods of reproduction. This is the feature that accurately reflects
their distinct evolutionary relationships.
Figure 7 (top) Flying phalanger
(Petaurus sp.) - a marsupial mammal
and (bottom) flying squirrel (family
Pteromyini) - a placental mammal
261
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
10
Study tip
Student's t test
Student's t test is used to compare the mean values of two sets of
data. To use this test the data collected must be normally distributed
and enough data should be collected to calculate a reliable mean.
Different sample sizes may be used.
A full table of values of t is given in
the appendix
I=-
40
3 Worked example: Comparing mean petiole length in ivy grown in the light and shade
Student's t test is is calculated using the following compared with those in the shade due to chance
formula:
variation in the sample.
(Xi - X2)
2 Subtract the mean petiole length of sample
two from sample one:
Xi - X2 = 38.9 - 52.8 = (-)13.9
Note: ignore minus signs.
1. Az = mean of populations 1 and 2
For both populations, square the standard
0,02, = standard deviation of populations 1 and 2 deviation and divide by the number in the
n, n, = total number of values in samples 1 and 2 sample:
A sample of ten ivy leaves was collected from
Population 1: % -40 = 22.201
10
either side of a tall tree stump. Those collected
from the south-facing side of the trunk were
Population 2:02- 15.1 = 22.801
n 10
referred to as the 'light' leaves and those on the
4 Sum these values:
north-facing side of the stump, the 'shade' leaves.
A group of students wanted to see if there was
02 = 22.201 + 22.801 = 45.002
a significant difference in the size of the leaf's
12112
petiole, depending on whether ivy is grown in 5 Square root this value
the light or the shade.
o
Before calculating Student's 1 test, the students
g = 45.002 = 6.71
had to produce a null hypothesis. This is a
prediction that there is no significant difference
Calculate Student's i test
between specified populations, and so any
(x1 - x2)
13.9
observed difference would be due to chance
variation in the sample.
Vn ne
The data the students collected is summarised
To understand what this value means, you must
below:
look it up in the Student's t test significance tables
Sample Number Mean petiole Standard (see appendix). First, calculate a quantity known
taken in sample length/mm deviation/mm as the 'degrees of freedom' (df) using the formula:
Light
10
14.9
df = (n + n,) - 2 where n = population 1,
n2 = population 2
Shade
10
52.8
15.1
In this example: df = in, + n ) - 2
The students then used the Student's t test
= (10 + 10) - 2 = 18
to determine if there is statistical significance
Then look at the corresponding probability
between the petiole length of ivy grown in the
values. For the data to be considered significantly
light, compared to those grown in the shade:
different from chance alone, the probability (p)
1 State the null hypothesis:
must be 5% (0.05) or less.
=
=
=
6.71 = 2.07
38.9
There will be no difference in the length of ivy
petiole length of leaves growing in the light,
At df = 18, the value of 2.07 falls between 5%
and 10%.
255
10
10.6 Representing variation graphically
The null hypothesis should be accepted, as we
cannot be more that 95% confident that the
results are not down to chance. We therefore
cannot conclude that there is a significant
difference between the petiole length of ivy
grown in the light and in the shade.
Correlation coefficient
If two sets of data are related they are said to be correlated. Two sets
of data can show:
•
no correlation - no relationship between the data (Figure 9)
positive correlation - as one set of data increases in value, the
other set of data also increases in value (Figure 7)
negative correlation - as one set of data increases in value, the
other set of data decreases in value (Figure 8).
Study tip
A significant difference at p = 0.05 means that if the null
hypothesis were correct i.e., the samples or treatments do
not differ) then we would expect to get a t value as great
as this on less than 5% of occasions. You can therefore
be reasonably confident that the samples do differ from
one another, but there is still nearly a 5% chance of this
conclusion being wrong
If the calculated t value exceeds the tabulated value for
p=0.01, then there is a 99% chance of the means being
significantly different (and a 99.9% chance if the calculated
t value exceeds the tabulated value for p = 0.001). By
convention, a difference between means at the 95% level is
significant', a difference at 99% level is 'highly significant
and a difference at the 99.9% level is very highly significant'.
x
x
positive correlation +1
negative correlation +1
no correlation +1
Figure 7 Graph showing positive
correlation
A Figure 8 Graph showing negative
correlation
Figure 9 Graph showing no
correlation
Study tip
The correlation test is used to see if two different variables are correlated in
a linear fashion in the context of a scatter-graph. There are several different
types of statistical test that can be used, the OCR GCE Biology specifications
will only cover Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. You can find a full table
of values in the appendix.
256
10
10.7 Adaptations
Examples include:
marsupial and placental mice - both are small, agile climbers that
live in dense ground cover and forage at night for small food items.
The two mice are very similar in size and body shape
flying phalangers and flying squirrels (Figure 7) - both are
gliders that eat insects and plants. Their skin is stretched between
their forelimbs and hind limbs to provide a large surface area for
gliding from one tree to the next
marsupial and placental moles (Figure 8) - both burrow
through soft soil to find worms and grubs. They have a
streamlined body shape and modified forelimbs for digging. They
also have velvety fur, which allows smooth movement through
the soil. However, they differ in fur colour – the marsupial mole
ranges in colour from white to orange whereas the placental mole
is grey.
Convergent evolution can also been seen in some plant species.
For example, aloe and agave appear very similar as they have both
adapted to survive in the desert. However, these species developed
entirely separately from each other. Aloe are sometimes referred
to as 'old world', having evolved in sub-Saharan Africa. Agave, by
comparison, are 'new world', having evolved in Mexico and the
southern United States.
aloe
agave
A FIGURE 8 (top) Marsuipal mole
(family Notoryctidae) found in Australia
and (bottom) placental mole (family
Talpidae) found in North America
Figure 9 Aloe Aloe spp.) and agave (Agave spp.) have a similar
appearance. They provide an example of convergent evolution
amongst plant species
Classification of giant pandas
Classification aims to place every organism into a
particular taxonomical group. However, there are a number
of organisms that do not fit easily into a group. An example
of this is the giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca -
Figure 10, top).
bottom). He gave it a name that included the word ursus
(the Latin word for bear).
Père Armand David, a catholic priest, was the first
westerner to see a giant panda. He discovered the panda
in 1869, and based on its appearance he concluded
that it was related to a bear (family Ursidae - Figure 10,
A few years later, Alphonse Milne-Edwards, a French
scientist, inspected the remains of a giant panda. He
concluded that its anatomical structure was closer to the
red panda (Figure 10, middle), a member of the raccoon
family. He renamed the giant panda, and classified it into
its own category. Many people disagreed with Milne-
Edwards' conclusion because of its size. Red pandas have
262
10
10.6 Representing variation graphically
4
Measured value (x)- mean value (1)
= 28 - 38.9 = -10.9 mm
For the other measurements you would
calculate: -8.9 mm, -21.9 mm, -7.9 mm,
-3.9 mm, 6.1 mm, 7.1 mm, 28.1 mm,
-5.9 mm, 18.1 mm
Sum each of these values [ (x - 2)2
118.8 + 79.2 + 479.6 + 62.4 + 15.2 + 37.2 +
50.4 + 789.6 + 34.8 + 327.6 = 1994.8 mm
5
One
3
Square each of these values (x - x)2
For example -10.92 = 118.81
For the other measurements you would
calculate: 79.2 mm, 479.6 mm, 62.4mm,
15.2 mm, 37.2 mm, 50.4mm, 789.6 mm,
34.8 mm, 327.6 mm
Divide this value by the sample size minus
(x-X)?
one -
(x - 1)_1194.8 – 1194.8 - 221.7
n-1 10-
19
(x - x)
Find the square root of this value
n-1
6
o = /(x=* = V221.7 = 14.9
-= V221.7 = 14.9
11-1
Flagella length variation in Salmonella
o
Salmonella bacteria have a number of flagella to enable them to move.
Five bacteria were chosen at random, and their longest flagellum measured.
This is the data that was collected:
2
3
4
5
Bacterium
Longest flagellum (um)
1
3.0
2.5
1.8
2.0
2.7
A Figure 6 This is a Salmonella bacteria
(Salmonella sp.). The length of their flagella
shows continuous variation
1 Calculate the mean value for the length of flagella in Salmonella
bacteria.
2 Using the formula given in the worked example, calculate the
standard deviation for the length of flagella in Salmonella bacteria.
State your answer to two decimal places.
State the range of flagella lengths that 68% of the Salmonella
population will have.
State and explain what type of variation is shown by the length of
flagella in Salmonella.
Study tip
You will not be expected to learn the
formulae for statistical tests, but
you should have an understanding
of how these tests are calculated,
of the circumstances in which to
use them, and how to interpret
the results.
Other statistical tests
Several statistical tests can be used by scientists to determine the
significance of data collected. These tests can be used in a number of
situations, for example when comparing variation within populations,
or when comparing the effects of abiotic and biotic factors on
organisms (Chapter 11, Biodiversity). These include:
• Student's t test - this is used to compare the means of data values
of two populations
the correlation coefficient - this is used to consider the relationship
of between two sets of data.
254
10
10.7 Adaptations
Synoptic link
You learnt about transpiration in
Topic 9.3, Transpiration and about
plant adaptations to prevent water
loss in Topic 9.5, Plant adaptations to
water availability.
Marram grass
Marram grass (Ammophila spp.) is commonly found on sand dunes
around the UK. It is a xerophyte, a plant that has adapted to live in
an environment with little water. Its adaptations reduce the rate of
transpiration and include:
curled (or rolled) leaves to minimise the surface area of moist
tissue exposed to the air, and protect the leaves from the wind
• hairs on the inside surface of the leaves to trap moist air
close to the leaf, reducing the diffusion gradient
stomata sunk into pits, which make them less likely to
open and lose water
. a thick waxy cuticle on the leaves and stems, reducing
water loss through evaporation.
Behavioural adaptations
Some examples of behavioural adaptations:
Survival behaviours - for example, an opossum plays
dead and a rabbit freezes when they think they have
been seen.
Courtship - many animals exhibit elaborate courtship
behaviours to attract a mate. For example, scorpions
perform a dance to attract a partner. This increases the
organism's chance of reproducing.
Figure 3 A light micrograph of a curled leaf of
Seasonal behaviours - these adaptations enable
marram grass plant (Ammophila arenaria). You
can see the hairs on the inside surface of the leaf,
organisms to cope with changes in their environment.
slowing air movement and reducing water loss
They include:
from the leaf (* 10 magnification)
I migration - animals move from one region to
another, and then back again when environmental
conditions are more favourable. This may be for a
better climate or a source of food
hibernation - a period of inactivity in which an
animal's body temperature, heart rate and breathing
rate slow down to conserve energy, reducing the
animal's requirement for food. For example, brown
bears hibernate during the winter.
Generally, behavioural adaptations fall into two main categories:
Innate (or instinctive) behaviour – the ability to do this is
inherited through genes. For example, the behaviour of spiders to
build webs and woodlice to avoid light is innate. This allows the
organism to survive in the habitat in which it lives.
Learned behaviour - these adaptations are learnt from
experience or from observing other animals. An example of
learned behaviour is the use of tools. For example, sea otters use
stones to hammer shells off rocks, and then to crack the hard
shells open.
A Figure 4 This chimpanzee is using
a twig/grass to get termites out of a
termite mound
However, many behavioural adaptations are a combination of both
innate and learned behaviours.
260
10
10.5 Types of variation
Synoptic link
You learnt about errors in
DNA replication (mutations)
in Topic 3.9, DNA replication and
DNA replication and the genetic
code in Topic 6.2, Mitosis.
Genetic causes of variation
Genetic variation is due to the genes (and alleles) an individual
possesses. There are several causes for genetic variation being present
within a population:
1
3
Alleles (variants) - genes have different alleles (alternative
forms). With a gene for a particular characteristic, different
alleles produce different effects. For example, the gene for
human blood groups has three different alleles (A, B and O).
Depending on the parental combination of these alleles (see
point 4) four different blood groups can be produced (A, B,
AB and O). Individuals in a species population may inherit
different alleles of a gene.
Mutations - changes to the DNA sequence and therefore
to genes can lead to changes in the proteins that are coded
for. These protein changes can affect physical and metabolic
characteristics. If a mutation occurs in somatic (body) cells, just
the individual is affected. However, if a mutation occurs in the
gametes it may be passed on to the organism's offspring. Both
can result in variation.
Meiosis - gametes (sex cells – ovum and sperm) are produced by
the process of meiosis in organisms that reproduce sexually. Each
gamete receives half the genetic content of a parent cell. Before
the nucleus divides and chromatids of a chromosome separate, the
genetic material inherited from the two parents is 'mixed up' by
independent assortment and crossing over. This leads to the
gametes of an individual showing variation.
Sexual reproduction - the offspring produced from two
individuals inherits genes (alleles) from each of the parents. Each
individual produced therefore differs from the parents.
Chance - many different gametes are produced from the parental
genome. During sexual reproduction it is a result of chance as to
which two combine (often referred to as random fertilisation).
The individuals produced therefore also differ from their siblings
as each contains a unique combination of genetic
material.
Synoptic link
You learnt about independent
assortment and crossing over
during meiosis in Topic 6.3,
Module.
4
5
Points 3, 4 and 5 are all aspects of sexual
reproduction. As a result there is much greater
variation in organisms that reproduce sexually
than asexually. Asexual reproduction results in
the production of clones (individuals that are
genetically identical to their parents). Genetic
variation can only be increased in these organisms
as a result of mutation.
Figure 4 These scars on the manatee's back are caused
by damage from a boat propeller. They are an example of
environmental variation
An example of a characteristic that is determined
purely by genetic variation is your blood group.
The genes passed onto you from your parents
determine if your blood group will be type A, B,
AB or 0.
248
10.5 Types of variation
Specification reference: 4.2.2
You can tell that a mouse and a bird are different organisms as they
have many different characteristics. However, it is more difficult to
tell the difference between two individual wood pigeons (Columba
palumbus). This is because members of the same species share many
characteristics.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ interspecific and intraspecific
variation
genetic and environmental
causes of variation.
The differences in characteristics between organisms are called variations.
Types of variation
The widest type of variation is between members of different species -
these differences are known as interspecifc variation. For example,
a mouse has four legs, teeth, and fur whereas a bird has two legs, two
wings, a beak and feathers.
Every organism in the world is different - even identical twins differ in
some ways.
Differences between organisms within a species are called
intraspecific variation. For example, people vary in height, build,
hair colour, and intelligence.
A Figure 2 Dogs show immense
variation within their species. For example,
this Pug and Great Dane are both members
of the species Canis familiaris. The
differences between these individuals are
examples of intraspecific variation. Due to
humans selectively breeding dogs for their
particular characteristics, the differences
are more extreme than those that would
occur naturally
Figure 1 These organisms all belong to the Plantae kingdom but they are
members of different species. The differences between them are examples of
interspecific variation
Causes of variation
Two factors cause variation:
An organism's genetic material - differences in the genetic
material an organism inherits from its parents leads to genetic
variation.
The environment in which the organism lives - this causes
environmental variation.
A Figure 3 These are wingcases of
several fourteen-spot ladybirds (Propylea
14-punctata) collected from the same
nettle plant. The variation in colouration
patterns between the individuals is an
example of intraspecific variation
247
10.7 Adaptations
Specification reference: 4.2.2
You should be familiar with the concept that organisms are adapted to
the environment in which they live. Organisms can also be adapted to
protect themselves from predators or attract a mate.
What are adaptations?
Adaptations are characteristics that increase an organism's chance
of survival and reproduction in its environment. Adaptations can be
divided into three groups:
. anatomical adaptations - physical features (internal and
external)
behavioural adaptations - the way an organism acts. These can
be inherited or learnt from their parents.
physiological adaptations - processes that take place inside
an organism.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
the different types of
adaptations of organisms to
their environment
why organisms from different
taxonomic groups may show
similar anatomical features.
Many adaptations fall into more than one category. For example, the
courtship behaviour of a peacock requires it to lift its huge, colourful
tail to attract the peahen. This is an example of both a behavioural and
anatomical adaptation.
Anatomical adaptations
Some examples of anatomical adaptations:
A Figure 1 Otters (Lutra spp.) have
webbed paws. This allows them to
swim as well as walk. This is an example
of an anatomical adaptation. It increases
their chance of survival as they can
live and hunt on land and in the water
(* 10 magnification)
Body covering - animals have a number of different body
coverings such as hair, scales, spines, feathers, and shells. These
can: help the organism to fly, such as feathers on birds - help
it to stay warm, such as the thick hair on polar bears - provide
protection, such as a snail's shell. Thick waxy layers on plants
prevent water loss and spikes can deter herbivores and protect the
tissues from sun damage.
Camouflage – the outer colour of an animal allows it to blend
into its environment, making it harder for predators to spot it.
For example, the snowshoe hare is white in winter to match the
snow, and turns brown in summer to blend in with the soil and
rock environment in which it lives.
Teeth – the shape and type of teeth present in an animal's
jaw are related to its diet. Herbivores, such as sheep, have
continuously growing molars for chewing tough grass and
plants. Carnivores, such as tigers, have sharp large canines to
kill prey and tear meat.
Mimicry - copying another animal's appearance or sounds allows
a harmless organism to fool predators into thinking it is poisonous
or dangerous. For example, the harmless hoverfly mimics the
markings of a wasp to deter predators.
Figure 2 The harmless milk snake
(Lampropeltis triangulum, top) mimics
the markings of the deadly coral snake
(Micrurus alleni, bottom)
259
10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
68%
68% of values are within
1 standard deviation of the mean
-3
-2
2
3
-
standard deviation
95%
95% of values are within
2 standard deviations of the mean
-3
-2
2
3
-1
1
standard deviation
99.7%
99.7% of values are within
3 standard deviations of the mean
-3 -2 -1
1 2 3
standard deviation
A Figure 4 Graphs showing spread of data on a normal distribution
A Figure 5 The petiole (stalk)
length of ivy (Hedera spp.) leaves
show continuous variation
Vn-1
Worked example: Petiole length variation in ivy leaves
Standard deviation (denoted with the Greek
Sample
letter o) is a measurement of the spread of data.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Number
It is calculated using the following formula:
Petiole
28 30 17 31 35 45 46 67 | 33 57
length/mm
- (x - )
1 Calculate the mean value x
I= the sum (total) of
sum of the individual measurements
number in the sample
x = value measured
x = mean value
10
n = total number of values in the sample
2 Subtract the mean value from each measured
value: x-X
Follow the worked example below to work out
the standard deviation of the length of petioles
For example, the first measurement was
(the stalk attaching the leaf to the stem) of a
28 mm.
sample of 10 ivy leaves. The data collected was:
= 389 = 38.9 mm
253
10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
• nutrients are acquired by ingestion - they are heterotrophic
feeders
food stored as glycogen.
Recent changes to classification systems
As scientists learn more about organisms, classification systems change.
Originally classification systems were based on observable features.
Through the study of genetics and other biological molecules, scientists
are now able to study the evolutionary relationships between organisms.
These links can then be used to classify organisms.
When organisms evolve, their internal and external features change,
as does their DNA. This is because their DNA determines the proteins
that are made, which in turn determines the organism's characteristics.
In order for their characteristics to have changed, their DNA must also
have changed. By comparing the similarities in the DNA and proteins of
different species, scientists can discover the evolutionary relationships
between them. You will learn more about DNA sequencing and its
use in studying evolutionary relationships in Topic 10.4, Evidence for
evolution
Synoptic link
An example of a protein that has changed in structure is haemoglobin.
Haemoglobin has four polypeptide chains, each made up of a fixed
number of amino acids. The haemoglobin of humans differs from
chimpanzees in only one amino acid, from gorillas in three amino acids
and from gibbons in eight amino acids. As the structure of haemoglobin
is remarkably similar, it indicates a common ancestry between the
various primate groups.
You learnt about haemoglobin
in Topic 3.7, Types of protein ans
Topic 8.4, Transport of oxygen and
carbon dioxide in the blood.
Are there now six kingdoms?
The current classification system used by scientists is known as the
"Three Domain System', and was proposed by Carl Woese, an American
microbiologist in 1977, reusing the word 'Kingdom'. In 1990 it was
renamed 'Domain'. Domains are a further level of classification at the
top of the hierarchy.
Synoptic link
Woese's system groups organisms using differences in the sequences
of nucleotides in the cells' ribosomal RNA (TRNA), as well as the
cells' membrane lipid structure and their sensitivity to antibiotics
Observation of these differences was made possible through advances
in scientific techniques.
You learnt about ribosomal RNA
and nucleotides in Topic 3.8
Nucleic acids.
Under the Three Domain System, organisms are classified into three
domains and six kingdoms. The three domains are Archaea, Bacteria,
and Eukarya. The organisms in the different domains contain a unique
form of rRNA and different ribosomes:
• Eukarya - have 80s ribosomes
1 RNA polymerase (responsible for most mRNA transcription)
contains 12 proteins.
237
10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
Environmental causes of variation
All organisms are affected by the environment in which they live,
although plants may be affected to a greater degree than animals
due to their lack of mobility. For example, two rose bushes are
planted in different positions in a garden. The one that has greater
access to the sun will generally grow larger than one in a shadier
position. As the plant cannot move to gain sunlight, it is more
affected by the environment than an animal, which could move to
another area to look for food or shelter.
An example of a characteristic that is determined purely by
environmental variation is the presence (or absence) of any scars on
your body. They will have occurred as a result of an accident or disease
and have no genetic origin. Scars cannot be inherited from a parent.
Figure 5 Hydrangeas (Hydrangea spp.) produce blue flowers in acidic soils and pink
flowers in alkaline soils. This is an example of environmental variation
Environmental and genetic causes
In most cases variation is caused by a combination of both environmental
and genetic factors.
If you have very tall parents, you have most likely inherited the genes
to also grow to a tall height. However, if you eat a very poor diet or
suffer from disease you may only grow to below average height.
Another example of a characteristic that shows both environmental and
genetic causes is your skin colour. This is determined by how much of
the pigment, melanin, it contains. The more melanin present in your
skin, the darker your skin is. Your skin colour at birth is determined
purely by genetics – however, when you expose your skin to sunlight
you produce more melanin to protect your skin from harmful UV rays.
This results in your skin turning darker.
Study tip
Examples of characteristics entirely
due to the environment and without
genetic influence are few.
As many characteristics are caused by a combination of both genetic
and environmental causes, it can be very difficult to investigate and
draw conclusions about the causes of a variation in any particular
case (however, see the Application on studying variation in identical
twins). This is often referred to as the 'nature versus nurture'
argument. For example, many studies have investigated the primary
cause of variation in intelligence - genetics or environment? To date,
no definitive conclusion has been reached.
For example, scarring as
discussed - some people have
skin that forms cheloid scars that
are very obvious, and others have
skin that heals easily with minimal
scarring. So even scarring has
genetic aspects.
However, the scars themselves
cannot be inherited - so have only
an environmental cause.
249
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
10
a mass of between 3 and 7 kg - the largest raccoons
have a mass of around 30 kg. By comparison, the giant
pandas can exceed 100 kg body mass.
1 Describe the adaptations of a giant panda.
2 Explain how you would classify a giant panda.
Give reasons for your classification.
3 Suggest how recent biological techniques could be
used to help classify the giant panda.
The debate over the classification of the giant panda has
continued for several decades.
Similarities to a red panda:
• Both eat bamboo and grip bamboo in the same manner.
• Both have similar snouts, teeth and paws.
Similarities to a bear:
In the 1950s, the first molecular-level analysis
of the giant panda occurred. Biologists used an
immunological method to assess the closeness of
bears to pandas. Through studying blood serum,
they concluded that the 'serological affinities of the
giant panda are with the bears rather than with the
raccoons'. The giant panda is therefore a true bear and
part of the Ursidae family, although it differentiated
early in history from other bears.
Both are a very similar shape and size.
• Both have shaggy fur.
. Both walk and climb in a similar manner.
Giant pandas and red pandas may have developed
similar ways of eating bamboo separately as a result of
convergent evolution. Equally, convergent evolution could
explain their resemblance to bears.
Despite the shared name, habitat type, and diet, as well
as a unique enlarged bone called the pseudo thumb
(which helps them grip bamboo shoots), the giant panda
and red panda are only distantly related. Molecular
studies place the red panda in its own family - Ailuridae.
Summary questions
1 Classify the following adaptations into anatomical, behavioural or
physiological adaptations:
melanin production; camouflage; migration; sharp canine
teeth; production of toxins; courtship dance
(3 marks)
2 State the difference between analogous and homologous
structures.
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
3 Which of the following is an example of convergent evolution?
Explain your answer.
a Insect wing and bird wing
b Bat wing and human arm
4 Select either a cactus or a hedgehog. For your chosen organism,
state and explain how it is adapted to survive successfully in
its habitat.
(4 marks)
5 State and explain how marsupial moles and placental moles
provide evidence for convergent evolution.
(4 marks)
A Figure 10 The giant panda (Ailuropoda
melanoleuca - top) shares characteristics
with both the red panda (Ailurus fulgens
- middle) and bears (family Ursidae - for
example this brown bear Ursus arctos -
bottom). As a result, scientists have argued
about how to classify giant pandas
263
10.8 Changing population
characteristics
Specification reference: 4.2.2
You have already learnt about the theory of evolution as a result of
natural selection in Topic 10.4 Evidence for evolution. This process
takes place over many, many generations; it generally takes several
thousand years for a species to evolve. However, evolution is a dynamic
process and is always occurring.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
► the mechanism by which
natural selection can affect
the characteristics of a
population over time
how evolution in some
species has implications for
human populations.
Natural selection
All organisms are exposed to selection pressures. These are factors that
affect the organism's chances of survival or reproductive success (the
ability to produce fertile offspring).
Organisms that are best adapted to their environment are more
likely to survive and reproduce. As a result of natural selection
these adaptations will become more common in the population.
Organisms that are poorly adapted are less likely to survive and
reproduce. Therefore their characteristics are not passed on to the
next generation. As a result, less of the population will display these
characteristics.
Natural selection follows a number of steps:
1
Study tip
When asked to explain why a
particular characteristic has
increased in a population, you
must first identify the adaptation.
Then explain how it helps
the organism to survive and
reproduce so that the organism
can pass on the allele coding
for the characteristic to the next
generation. Finally, state how this
increases the allele's frequency in
the population.
Organisms within a species show variation in their characteristics
that are caused by differences in their genes (genetic variation).
For example, they may have different alleles of a gene for a
particular characteristic. New alleles can arise by mutation.
Organisms whose characteristics are best adapted to a selection
pressure such as predation, competition (for mates and resources)
or disease, have an increased chance of surviving and successfully
reproducing. Less well-adapted organisms die or fail to reproduce.
This process is known as 'survival of the fittest'.
Successful organisms pass the allele encoding the advantageous
characteristic onto their offspring. Conversely, organisms that
possess the non-advantageous allele are less likely to successfully
pass it on.
This process is repeated for every generation. Over time, the
proportion of individuals with the advantageous adaptation
increases. Therefore the frequency of the allele that codes
for this particular characteristic increases in the population's
gene pool.
Over very long periods of time, many, many generations and often
involving multiple genes, this process can lead to the evolution of
a new species.
264
10
10.5 Types of variation
riation in identical twins
Many studies have been carried out on identical twins
to determine how much of a characteristic is a result
of genetic variation, and how much is a result of the
environment in which a person lives.
were fingernail biters
suffered from migraine headaches.
This is perhaps not too surprising. It was also discovered
that the twins shared a number of other astonishing
similarities. Both twins:
Identical twins are produced when an egg splits
after fertilisation. At this point each twin contains
identical genetic material, therefore they show no
genetic variation.
had owned a dog named Toy
. had been married twice (where both first wives were
called Linda, and the second wives both called Betty)
smoked the same brand of cigarettes
had studied carpentry and mechanical drawing.
If the twins are brought up in different environments,
the results of environment on variation can clearly be
seen. Even within the same environment, as the twins
grow they will show some variation. The characteristics
in which they show most variation must be influenced
more greatly by the environment than by genes. Those in
which they show least variation are controlled more by
genes than environment.
Of course, like other identical twins Jim Lewis and Jim
Springer were not identical copies of each other. The
two men styled their hair differently - one preferred
the medium of speech to communicate, while the other
preferred the written word.
One of the most famous case studies on identical twins
is the 'Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart'. This study
looked at the lives of several pairs of identical twins. One
pair was known as the 'Jim twins'. Identical twins Jim
Lewis and Jim Springer were four weeks old when they
were separated, and adopted into different families. They
were later reunited, aged 39. At this point, the similarities
the twins shared amazed researchers at the University
of Minnesota. Many physical characteristics were shared;
both twins:
1 Why are identical twins used in variation studies?
2 Why do differences between identical twins
increase as they age?
Look at these data. What can you determine
about the genetic and environmental causes
of these characteristics?
08 LOOM
Twin
Height
A
B
Eye Ear
colour piercing
brown yes
brown no
1.79 m
1.81m
• were 6 feet tall
had a body mass of 82 kg (13 stone)
Body
mass
100 kg
85 kg
Summary questions
1 State the difference between interspecific and intraspecific
variation.
(1 mark)
2 a Name two human characteristics with variation caused
solely by the environment.
b Name two human characteristics with variation caused
solely by genetics.
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
3 Explain some of the causes of variation of human hair.
(3 marks)
4 Explain why genetic variation is more common in organisms
that reproduce sexually.
(3 marks)
250
10
10.2 The five kingdoms
Archaea – have 70s ribosomes
1 RNA polymerase of different organisms contains between eight
and 10 proteins and is very similar to eukaryotic ribosome.
• Bacteria - have 70s ribosomes
I RNA polymerase contains five proteins.
The organisation of this system is shown in Figure 4.
common
ancestor
Bacteria
Bacten
Carenacea
Archaea
Eukarya
Eukanya
three domains
three domains
Eubacteria
Archae-
bacteria
Protoctista
Plantae
Fungi
Animalia
six kingdoms
A Figure 4 The three domain, six kingdom classification system
In Woese's system the Prokaryotae kingdom becomes divided into two
kingdoms - Archaebacteria and Eubacteria. The six kingdoms are therefore:
Archaebacteria, Eubacteria, Protoctista, Fungi, Plantae and Animalia.
Although both Archaebacteria and Eubacteria are single-celled
prokaryotes, Eubacteria are classified in their own kingdom because
their chemical makeup is different from Archaebacteria. For example,
they contain peptidoglycan (a polymer of sugars and amino acids) in
their cell wall whereas Archaebacteria do not.
Archaebacteria
Archaebacteria, also known as ancient bacteria, can live in extreme
environments. These include hot thermal vents, anaerobic conditions, and
highly acidic environments. For example, methanogens live in anaerobic
environments such as sewage treatment plants and make methane.
Eubacteria
Eubacteria, also known as true bacteria, are found in all environments
and are the ones you will be most familiar with. Most bacteria are of
the Eubacteria kingdom.
Some scientists still use the traditional five kingdom system, but
since Archaebacteria have been found to be different chemically
from Eubacteria, most scientists now use the three domain, six
kingdom system.
Figure 5 The hot springs of Yellow
stone National Park, USA, were among
the first places Archaebacteria were
discovered. These types of bacteria are
called thermophiles. They can survive
in extreme heat
238
10
10.8 Changing population characteristics
Study tip
The two different colour forms
of peppered moths are due to
different alleles - they are not
different species. Dark and pale
peppered moths can interbreed
and produce fertile offspring. They
are variations of the same species.
the Australian National Insect Collection. Two Australian sheep
blowflies were studied, Lucilia cuprina and the closely related
Lucilia sericata. The researchers compared the blowflies' resistance
genes before and after the introduction of the pesticide. Diazinon
resistance was not found in the DNA of the 70-year-old flies,
whereas it is present in the modern species. However, when
they performed the same investigation with malathion (another
organophosphate pesticide), they found resistance alleles in both
the old and modern blowflies, showing there was pre-existing
resistance to this chemical.
The scientists concluded that pre-adaptation contributed to the
development of diazinon-resistance. Pre-adaptation is when an
organism's existing trait is advantageous for a new situation. The
alteration in the DNA that caused the pre-existing resistance allowed
the flies to rapidly develop resistance to organophosphate chemicals in
general, and ultimately a specific diazinon-resistance allele.
The existence of pre-adaptation in an organism may help researchers
predict potential insecticide resistance in the future.
Flavobacterium
Most evolution occurs as a negative result of selection pressures.
However, some organisms have evolved due to opportunities that
have arisen in their environment. For example, scientists have
found a new strain of Flavobacterium living in waste water from
factories that produce nylon 6. Nylon 6 is used to make objects like
toothbrushes and violin strings. This strain of bacteria has evolved
to digest nylon and is therefore beneficial to humans as they help to
clear up factory waste.
A Figure 2 Scientists have discovered
that sheep blowflies (Lucilia spp.) have
an inbuilt natural resistance to some
organophosphate insecticides. This
allowed their rapid evolution to become
resistant to the pesticide diazinon
These bacteria use enzymes to digest the nylon known as nylonases.
They are unlike any enzymes found in other strains of Flavobacterium,
and they do not help the bacteria to digest any other known material.
It is beneficial to the bacteria as it provides them with another source
of nutrients.
Synoptic link
You learnt about genetic mutations
in Topic 3.9, DNA replication and
the genetic code.
Most scientists believe that the gene mutation that occurred to produce
these enzymes was a result of a gene duplication, combined with a
frameshift mutation (an insertion or deletion of DNA bases that causes
the genetic code to be read incorrectly).
Anolis lizards
When a few individuals of a species colonise a new
area, their offspring initially experience a loss in genetic
variation, often resulting in individuals that are physically
and genetically different from their source population.
This is known as the founder effect.
A 14-year experiment (led by Kolbe, a biologist at the
University of Rhode Island) was carried out to study
evolution. Pairs of Anolis sagrei were released across
14 small Caribbean islands that had no previous
lizard populations. During the experiment, the lizard
populations each became adapted to their respective
environments through changes in their body shape
driven by the flora in their environment. Several new
species of lizards evolved.
266
10
10.6 Representing variation graphically
Table 1 Frequency of heights
(measured to the nearest 2 cm)
Height/cm
Frequency
140
0
144
frequency (dependent variable)
148
23
152
90
156
261
160
393
164
458
168
413
140 144 148 152 156 160 164 168 172 176 180 184 188 192
height/cm (independent variable)
A Figure 1 This graph shows the frequency against height for a sample of humans.
The height of the human population ranges from the shortest person in the world to
the tallest person. A person's height can take any value in between. This is an example
of continuous variation
172
177
176
63
180
distribution curve (Figure 3). The data is said to be normally
distributed
184
188
Characteristics of a normal distribution:
190
192
The mean, mode, and median are the same.
The distribution has a characteristic 'bell shape', which is symmetrical
about the mean.
50% of values are less than the mean and 50% are greater than
the mean.
Most values lie close to the mean value - the number of individuals
at the extremes are low.
mean
median
mode
symmetry
Figure 2 The surface area of the
leaves on this tree show continuous
variation - depending on their position
on the tree they have all grown to
slightly different sizes
50%
50%
Figure 3 A normal distribution curve
Standard deviation
The standard deviation is a measure of how spread out the data is.
The greater the standard deviation is, the greater the spread of the
data. In terms of variation, a characteristic which has a high standard
deviation has a large amount of variation.
When you calculate the standard deviation of data that display a
normal distribution you will generally find that:
252
10.6 Representing variation
graphically
Specification reference: 4.2.2
When studying variation, scientists take measurements of different
characteristics within a species. To allow reliable conclusions to be
formed, they need to collect measurements from large numbers of
the population. In order to analyse and interpret this data it can be
represented graphically. This allows any patterns to be seen clearly.
Based on the data collected, characteristics can be sorted into
those that show discontinuous variation and those that show
continuous variation.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the differences between
continuous and discontinuous
variation using examples
from plants, animals and
microorganisms
standard deviation as a
measure of spread of data
Student's t test to compare
means of data values of two
populations
→ correlation coefficient.
Discontinuous variation
A characteristic that can only result in certain values is said to show
discontinuous variation (or discrete variation). There can be no in-
between values. Variation determined purely by genetic factors falls
into this category. An animal's sex is an example of discontinuous
variation as there are only two possible functional values – male
or female.
An example of discontinuous variation in microorganisms is the shape
of bacteria. They can be spherical (cocci), rods (bacilli), spiral (spirilla),
comma (vibrios) or corkscrew shaped (spirochaetes).
Discontinuous variation is normally represented using a bar chart,
but a pie chart may also be used. Human blood groups also show
discontinuous variation. Like most other characteristics that show
discontinuous variation, it is controlled by a single gene,
the ABO gene.
Continuous variation
A characteristic that can take any value within a range is said to show
continuous variation. There is a graduation in values from one extreme
to the other of a characteristic - this is known as a continuum. The height
and mass of plants and animals are examples of such characteristics.
Characteristics that show continuous variation are not controlled by
a single gene but a number of genes (polygenes). They are also often
influenced by environmental factors.
Data on characteristics that show continuous variation are collected
in a frequency table (Table 1). These data are then plotted onto a
histogram (Figure 1). Normally a curve is then drawn onto the graph
to show the trend.
Normal distribution curves
When continuous variation data are plotted onto a graph, they usually
result in the production of a bell-shaped curve known as a normal
251
10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
Modern examples of evolution
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has developed
resistance to many antibiotics. Bacteria reproduce very rapidly and
so evolve in a relatively short time. When bacteria replicate, their
DNA can be altered and this usually results in the bacteria dying.
However, a mutation in some S. aureus arose that provided resistance
to methicillin
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the
development of drug resistance
in microorganisms in Topic 12.7,
Preventing and treating diseases.
When the bacteria were exposed to this antibiotic, resistant individuals
survived and reproduced, passing the allele for resistance on to their
offspring. Non-resistant individuals died. Over time the number of
resistant individuals in the population increased.
Peppered moths
Dramatic changes in the moth's environment in the 19th century
caused changes in allele frequency in peppered moths (Biston
betularia). Before the industrial revolution, most peppered moths
in Britain were pale coloured. This provided camouflage against
light-coloured tree bark, increasing their chance of survival. Those
that were dark were easily spotted by birds and eaten. The different
colourings are due to different alleles.
During the industrial revolution many trees became darker - partly
due to being covered in soot, and partly due to the loss of lichen cover
caused by increased atmospheric pollutants. The dark moths were now
better adapted, as they were more highly camouflaged. More dark
peppered moths survived and reproduced, increasing the frequency of
dark moths (and the 'dark' allele) in the population. After a few years
the number of dark peppered moths close to industrial towns and
cities became much higher than pale peppered moths.
Since the Clean Air Act of 1956 steps have been taken to improve
air quality in towns and cities, and to reduce the levels of pollution
released from factories. The bark on the vast majority of trees in the
UK is once again lighter coloured, and therefore the frequency of the
pale allele in the moth gene pool has increased.
Sheep blowflies
Sheep blowflies (Lucilia cuprina) lay their eggs in faecal matter around
a sheep's tail – the larvae then hatch and cause sores. This condition is
known as 'flystrike', and if left untreated is normally fatal.
In the 1950s in Australia, the pesticide diazinon (an organophosphate
pesticide) was used to kill the blow flies and prevent the condition.
Within six years, blowflies had developed a high level of resistance to
diazinon. Individual insects with resistance survived exposure to the
insecticide, and passed on this characteristic through their alleles,
allowing a resistant population to evolve.
Figure 1 Before the industrial
revolution, pale peppered moths (Biston
betularia) were better adapted to the
environment. During the industrial
revolution dark peppered moths were
now better adapted - therefore the
frequency of this characteristic increased
in the population
To investigate how this evolution occurred so quickly, scientists
extracted DNA from a sample of 70-year-old blowflies kept at
265
10.4 Evidence for evolution
Specification reference: 4.2.2
You are probably aware that Charles Darwin is credited with
formulating the theory of evolution. However, it was studying the
work of a number of other scientists as well as his own observations
that led him to develop his theory.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the evidence for the theory
of evolution by natural
selection, including fossils,
DNA and molecular evidence
the contribution of Darwin
and Wallace in formulating
the theory of evolution by
natural selection.
->
Evolution is the theory that describes the way in which organisms
evolve, or change, over many many years as a result of natural
selection. Darwin realised that organisms best suited to their
environment are more likely to survive and reproduce, passing
on their characteristics to their offspring. Gradually, a species
changes over time to have a more advantageous phenotype for the
environment in which it lives. We now know that the advantageous
characteristics are passed on from one generation to the next by genes
in DNA molecules.
Developing the theory of evolution
When Charles Darwin was born in 1809, most people in Europe
believed, in a literal sense, in the Christian Bible. They believed
God directly created all life on Earth, including human beings. The
Bible doesn't state how far in the past this occurred - in Darwin's day
the common belief was that this creation had occurred only a few
thousand years before.
Figure 1 Charles Darwin, author of
'On the Origin of Species'
In 1831 aboard the HMS Beagle, Darwin read 'Principles of Geology'.
This book was written by his friend Charles Lyell, a Scottish geologist.
He suggested that fossils were actually evidence of animals that had
lived millions of years ago. We now have scientific evidence that
supports this.
Synoptic link
You learnt about DNA as the molecule
of heredity in Topic 3.8, Nucleic acids
and 3.9, DNA replication and the
genetic code.
In it Lyell also popularised the principle of uniformitarianism (the
concept itself was originally proposed by another Scottish geologist,
James Hutton). This is the idea that in the past, the Earth was shaped
by forces that you can still see in action today, such as sedimentation
in rivers, wind erosion, and deposition of ash and lava from volcanic
eruptions. In emphasising these natural processes, he challenged
the claims of earlier geologists who had tried to explain geological
formations as a result of biblical events such as floods. This concept
prompted Darwin to think of evolution as a slow process,
one in which small changes gradually accumulate over very long
periods of time.
Darwin carried out some of his most famous observations on finches
in the Galapagos Islands. He noticed that different islands had different
finches. The birds were similar in many ways and thus must be closely
related, but their beaks and claws were different shapes and sizes.
1.
pinnen
teple oli
Figure 2 Darwin 'noticed that
the shape of the finches' beaks were
adapted to the food available on the
island
Through these observations Darwin realised that the design of the
finches' beaks was linked to the foods available on each island. He
concluded that a bird born with a beak more suited to the food
242
10
10.2 The five kingdoms
some are sessile, but others move by cilia, flagella, or
by amoeboid mechanisms
• nutrients are acquired by photosynthesis (autotrophic feeders),
ingestion of other organisms (heterotrophic feeders), or both -
some are parasitic.
Fungi
General features:
Examples include mushrooms, moulds, and
yeast.
Figure 2 This is an amoeba
(Amoeba proteus), it is member of the
Protoctista kingdom. Light micrograph
100 magnification
unicellular or multicellular
a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles and a cell wall
mainly composed of chitin
• no chloroplasts or chlorophyll
• no mechanisms for locomotion
most have a body or mycelium made of threads or hyphae
nutrients are acquired by absorption - mainly from decaying
material – they are saprophytic feeders - some are parasitic
most store their food as glycogen.
Plantae
Examples include flowering plants such
With over 250 000 species, as roses, trees such as oak, and grasses.
the plant kingdom is the second largest of the kingdoms.
A Figure 3 Two different types of fungi.
Top: Scanning electron micrograph of
microscopic yeast, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae ~2000 magnification.
Bottom: Large mushrooms
General features:
• multicellular
a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles including
chloroplasts, and a cell wall mainly composed of cellulose
all contain chlorophyll
most do not move, although gametes of some plants move using
cilia or flagella
nutrients are acquired by photosynthesis - they are autotrophic
feeders - organisms that make their own food
• store food as starch.
Animalia
The animal kingdom is the largest kingdom with over 1 million
known species.
Examples include mammals such as cats,
General features:
reptiles such as lizards, birds, insects,
• multicellular molluscs, worms, sponges, and anemones.
a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles (no cell walls)
no chloroplasts
move with the aid of cilia, flagella, or contractile proteins,
sometimes in the form of muscular organs
Study tip
You will need to be able to explain
how classification systems have
changed over time as an example
of advances in science.
236
10.2 The five kingdoms
Specification reference: 4.2.2
Originally living organisms were classified into just two kingdoms-
animals and plants. Aristotle (384-322 BC) classified animal species in
his text History of Animals, while his pupil Theophrastus (371-287 BC)
wrote a parallel work, History of Plants. The animal kingdom included
every living thing that moved, ate and grew to a certain size then
stopped growing. The plant kingdom included every living thing that
did not move or eat and that continued to grow throughout life.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the features used to
classify organisms into the
five kingdoms.
evidence that has been used
more recently in order to
clarify relationships including
evidence that has led to the
classification of organisms
into the three domains of life.
As more was discovered about organisms and more species were
discovered, it became increasingly difficult to divide living organisms
into just two kingdoms. For example, the introduction of the
microscope in the 16th to 17th century enabled scientists to study the
cells of an organism and showed that bacteria have a very different
cell structure to that of other organisms. From the 1960s, scientists
classified organisms into five kingdoms. This classification system was
introduced by Robert Whittaker, an American plant ecologist, based
on the principles developed by Carl Linnaeus.
What are the five kingdoms?
Living organisms can be classified into five kingdoms:
Prokaryotae (bacteria)
the prokaryotes
Protoctista (the unicellular eukaryotes)
Fungi (e.g., yeasts, moulds, and mushrooms) the eukaryotes
Plantae (the plants)
Animalia (the animals)
Synoptic link
You learnt about the difference in
the structure of prokaryotic cells
and eukaryotic cells in Topic 2.4,
Cell structure and Topic 2.6,
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
Organisms were originally classified into these kingdoms based on
similarities in their observable features, as described below.
Prokaryotae
General features:
Examples include the bacteria Escherichia coli,
Staphylococcus aureus, and Bacillus anthracis.
unicellular
no nucleus or other membrane-bound organelles - a ring of 'naked'
DNA - small ribosomes
no visible feeding mechanism - nutrients are absorbed through the
cell wall or produced internally by photosynthesis.
Protoctista
General features:
Examples include species belonging to the
genera Paramecium and Amoeba.
(mainly) unicellular
a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles
some have chloroplasts
Figure 1 This is Streptococcus
thermophilus, a type of bacteria used
in yoghurt production. All bacteria
belong to the Prokaryotae kingdom.
Scanning electron micrograph,
x 8000 magnification.
235
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
10
Then look at the top of the tree. You will see that species
A and B are sister groups as these share a common
ancestor. Species E and Fare also sister groups that
share their own common ancestor, which itself shared
a common ancestor with species D further back in time.
Further back in time again, C shared a common ancestor
with D, E and F.
1 Another species exists (species X) which shares
a common ancestor with species D. Add a line
onto Figure 1 to show the correct evolutionary
relationships of species X.
Species Y is now extinct but shared a common
ancestor with species A and Species B. Add
another line onto Figure 1 line to show where this
species should be placed on the phylogenetic tree.
Present
O 100 W
Advantages of phylogenetic classification
Phylogeny can be done without reference to Linnaean
classification. Classification uses knowledge of phylogeny in
order to confirm the classification groups are correct or causes
them to be changed. For example, a dolphin has many of the
same characteristics as a fish, so in theory a dolphin could be
classified as a fish. However, knowledge of the phylogeny of
dolphins confirms its classification as a mammal.
Pleistocano
Pliocene
Other advantages:
Miacona
euadobio
Eocene
Phylogeny produces a continuous tree whereas classification
requires discrete taxonomical groups. Scientists are not forced
to put organisms into a specific group that they do not quite fit.
The hierarchal nature of Linnaean classification can be
misleading as it implies different groups within the same
rank are equivalent. For example, the cats (Felidae) and the
orchids (Orchidaceae) are both families. However, the two
groups are not comparable - one has a longer history than
the other cats have existed for around 30 million years, but Figure 3 All species of elephant evolved from
orchids have been in existence for over 100 million years). a palaeomastodon, which lived around 40 million
The two families also have different levels of diversity (with years ago. Over time their appearance changed as
approximately 35 cat species and 20000 orchid species) and the elephant adapted to the current environment.
different degrees of biological differentiation (many orchids Today, only two species of elephant survive -- the
of different genera are able to hybridise, but cats cannot). Indian and African elephant. The timeline stops for
the other species of elephant as they are now extinct
Summary questions
1 State the main difference between early classification
systems and systems based on phylogeny. (1 mark)
C Explain how the diagram shows that birds are more
closely related to crocodiles than turtles. (2 marks)
turtles lizards snakes birds
crocodiles present
dinosaurs
2 Describe the advantages of phylogenetic
classification over the Linnaean system.
(3 marks)
0. Use the information in the phylogenetic
V tree to answer the following questions:
a State which group of organisms is most
closely related to lizards.
(1 mark)
b Explain why dinosaurs are listed lower in
the diagram than the other organisms. (2n
common ancestor
past
241
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
10
Table 2 Classification of humans
Classification of humans
You belong to a species named Homo sapiens. This is the scientific name
for humans. Humans are classified as shown in Table 2.
Level of hierarchy
Human
Domain
Eukarya
Animalia
Kingdom
Phylum
Chordata
Naming organisms
Before classification systems were widely used, many organisms were
given names according to certain physical characteristics, behaviour
or habitat. Examples are 'blackbirds' for their colour, 'song thrushes'
for their song and 'fieldfares' for their habitat. These are called their
'common names'.
Class
Mammalia
Order
Primates
Hominidae
Family
Genus
(plural - genera)
Species
Homo
sapiens
This was not a very useful system for scientists working internationally,
as organisms may have more than one common name, and different
names in different languages. Another problem is that common names
do not provide information about relationships between organisms.
For example, the blackbird, song thrush, and fieldfare all belong to the
genus Turdus, meaning that they have all evolved from a common
ancestor, but you wouldn't know this from their common names, nor
necessarily from their observable characteristics.
A Figure 3 The blackbird (Turdus merula), song thrush (Turdus philomelos) and
fieldfare (Turdus pilaris) all belong to the genus Turdus
To ensure scientists the world over are discussing the same organism
we now use a system developed in the 18th century, also by Carl
Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist. This system is known as binomial
nomenclature.
All species are given a scientific name consisting of two parts:
The first word indicates the organism's genus. It is called the
generic name; you can think of this as being equivalent to your
surname or family name, as it is shared by close relatives.
The second word indicates the organism's species. It is called the
specific name.
Unlike people, no two species have the same generic and specific
name. Two different species could have the same specific name,
however their genus would be different. An example of this is
Anolis cuvieri (a lizard) and Oplurus cuvieri (a bird). The only link
between them is that they are both named after the famous French
naturalist and zoologist Georges Cuvier (1769-1832). Many of
these scientific names derive from Latin.
Study tip
The abbreviation for species 'sp'
is used after genus, when not
identifying the species fully. For
example, you may only know the
willow tree in your garden to be
Salix sp.
When naming an organism using its scientific name the word should
be presented in italics. As it is difficult to handwrite in italics, the
The plural 'spp.' is used to refer to
multiple species within a genus.
233
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
10
The three-domain system
Bacteria
Archaea
Eukarya
The six-kingdom system
Eubacteria
Archaebacteria
Protoctista
Fungi
Plantae
Animalia
The traditional five-kingdom system
Prokaryotae
Protoctista
Fungi
Plantae
Animalia
A Figure 6 This diagram shows how the three commonly used classification systems are related
Summary questions
1 State two differences between fungi and plants.
(2 marks)
2 Using the information in this topic, classify the following organisms
into the correct kingdom using your knowledge of the Five kingdom
system of classification:
a Escherichia coli - an organism that lives in the human intestine.
It is unicellular and has no nucleus.
b Saccharomyces cerevisiae - an organism used in the manufacture of
beer. It is unicellular and has a nucleus and a cell wall made of chitin.
C Euglena - an organism that lives in fresh water.
It is unicellular and contains chloroplasts.
(3 marks)
3 Explain why prokaryotes are now classified as two
separate domains.
(3 marks)
4 Describe how and why classification systems have changed
O over time.
(6 marks)
239
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
10
1 State what is meant by the founder effect.
2 Explain why these particular islands were an ideal
location for the experiment.
Figure 3 A male Anolis lizard (Anolis sagrei) displaying its
eye-catching dewlap. When enlarged it makes the lizard appear
much bigger than it really is. This mechanism is used to ward
off predators and to attract females during the mating season
To determine how much of the evolution of the new
species was due to the founder effect, and how much
resulted from natural selection, Kolbe randomly selected
pairs of Anolis lizards from the island of Iron Cay. He then
released these organisms onto seven smaller islands that
had no lizard population. Each island had the same types
of insects, birds and short scrub vegetation but differed
from Iron Cay, which is covered in forest.
Forest Anolis lizards have long hind limbs, which
allow them to move quickly across thick branches,
whereas short limbs give scrub-living lizards stability
to walk along narrow perches. The scientists therefore
predicted that the lizards in their experiment would
develop shorter hind limbs than those of the lizards
on Iron Cay.
After one year, the researchers noticed that the offspring
of the experimental lizards had less genetic variability
than the Iron Cay lizards - the founder effect. There were
also significant differences in hind-limb length among
the lizards on the islands. As the founder effect is a
random process independent of the environment, there
was no pattern to the length of the lizards' hind limbs.
Over the next few years the lizards' hind limbs on all the
experimental islands got shorter, making them better
suited for their environment - natural selection.
Kolbe concluded that both processes were evident during
the experimental period.
3 Explain why scientists thought the lizards would
develop short hind limbs.
4 Explain how the scientists showed whether the
evolution was mainly a result of the founder effect
or natural selection.
5 Some scientists were surprised that all the new
populations of species survived as the presence of
only a few individuals leads to inbreeding. Explain
why this is disadvantageous.
Summary questions
1 State three selection pressures that may be experienced
by a plant species.
2 Describe the process of natural selection.
(1 mark)
(3 marks)
3 DDT is a chemical insecticide that was used to kill mosquitoes
to prevent the spread of malaria. Several years after its introduction
large populations of mosquitoes became DDT resistant.
Explain how this occurred.
(4 marks)
4 Using examples, state and explain the positive and negative
effects on humans of recent examples of evolution in
some species.
(6 marks)
267
10
Chapter 10 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 As part of a sample collected from the Indian
Ocean, scientists identified an organism as
Hydrophis spiralis. Which of the following
statements is/are correct about this organism?
Statement 1: The organism belongs to the
family Hydrophis
Statement 2: The organism belongs to the
species spiralis
Statement 3: The organism belongs to the
genus spiralis
A 1, 2 and 3 are correct
B 1 and 2 are correct
C2 and 3 are correct
D Only 1 is correct
(1 mark)
2 Figure 1 shows an electron micrograph of an
invertebrate known as 'water bear'.
called the Tardigrada. Tardigrades form
part of the kingdom........ ........ Within
the domain............
(5 marks)
State the meaning of the term phylogeny
and explain how phylogeny is related to
classification.
(3 marks)
Water bears are extremely common in
many habitats, including household
gardens. However, they were not
discovered until approximately
300 years ago.
Suggest reasons why they were not
known before this time.
(2 marks)
OCR June 2013 F212/01
3
Living organisms can be classified into five
kingdoms, based on certain key characteristics.
a Table 1 shows some of the characteristics
of the five kingdoms.
Copy and complete the table
kingdom I membrane cell wall type(s) of
bound organelles
nutrition
prokaryote absent present - made
of peptidoglycan
present
sometimes heterotrophic
present - and
composition autotrophic
varies
A Figure 1
a Complete the following passage about
the classification of water bears using the
most appropriate terms.
The water bear, Eschiniscus trisetosus is a
member of the genus................and the
family Echiniscidae. This family belongs to
the.....................Eschiniscoidea, which
forms part of the class Heterotardigrada.
Water bears, also known as tardigrades,
are classified into a...... of their own
Fungi
present - made heterotrophic
of chitin
present
autotrophic
animal
absent
heterotrophic
(6 marks)
b An unknown species is discovered. Its
cells contain many nuclei scattered
throughout the cytoplasm of thread-like
structures.
Suggest the kingdom to which this species
belongs
(1 mark)
c Living organisms can also be classified
into three groups called domains.
Outline the features of this system of
classification compared with the five
kingdom system.
(3 marks)
OCR F212/01 2012
268
10.3 Phylogeny
Specification reference: 4.2.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the relationship between
classification and phylogeny.
In the last topic you studied how the current classification system is
based on both shared physical characteristics between organisms and
on evolutionary relationships. To discover the links between organisms
and common ancestors, scientists study the organisms' DNA, proteins,
and the fossil record.
Phylogeny
Phylogeny is the name given to the evolutionary relationships
between organisms. The study of the evolutionary history of groups
of organisms is known as phylogenetics. It reveals which group
a particular organism is related to, and how closely related these
organisms are. You will learn more about the evidence that scientists
use to study evolutionary relationships in the next topic.
Classification can occur without any knowledge of phylogeny, as
occurred in the past. However, it is the objective of many scientists to
develop a classification system that also correctly takes into account
the phylogeny of an organism.
camels pigs ruminants whales hippos
Phylogenetic trees
A phylogenetic tree (or evolutionary tree) is a diagram used to
represent the evolutionary relationships between organisms. They are
branched diagrams, which show that different species have evolved
from a common ancestor.
common ancestor
The closer the branches, the closer the
evolutionary relationship. Hippos and
whales are more closely related than
hippos and ruminants.
The diagram is similar in structure to that of a branching tree - the
earliest species is found at the base of the tree and the most recent
species are found at the tips of the branches.
A Figure 1 A phylogenetic tree showing
the evolutionary relationships between
certain mammals
Phylogenetic trees are produced by looking at similarities and
differences in species' physical characteristics and genetic makeup.
Much of the evidence has been gained from fossils.
TE
B
C
D
E
F
present
How do you interpret phylogenetic trees? Oo
The tips of the phylogenetic tree represent groups of
A
descendent organisms (often species). The nodes on the tree
(the points where the new lines branch off) represent the
common ancestors of those descendants. Two descendants
that split from the same node are called sister groups. The
closer the branches of the tree are, the closer the evolutionary
relationship.
Study Figure 2. Begin by looking at the base of the tree. The
organism at this point is the common ancestor of all the
organisms on the tree. The letters A-F represent six different
species that have evolved from this ancestor.
common ancestor
past
Figure 2 A phylogenetic tree structure
240
10
10.1 Classification
standard procedure in handwritten documents is to underline the
name. The name should be written in lowercase, with the exception
of the first letter of the genus name, which should be uppercase.
Some examples of scientific names are included in Table 3. Split
the name into two parts and you can easily work out which genus and
species the organism belongs to.
Table 3 Examples of scientific names
Common name
Scientific name
Genus
A Figure 4 This is a jungle cat (Felis
chaus). It is closely related to the
domestic cat (Felis catus) and both
belong to the genus Felis
Species
familiaris
dog
Canis familiaris
Canis
lion
Panthera leo
Panthera
leo
Bellis perennis
Bellis
perennis
daisy
Christmas tree
(Norway spruce)
E.coli
Picea abies
Picea
abies
Escherichia coli
Escherichia
coli
Summary questions
1 State two reasons why classification is important.
(2 marks)
2 Ligers are the offspring of male lions (Panthera leo) and
female tigers (Panthera tigris). Suggest two reasons why
ligers are not classified as a species, but their parents are.
3 Erithacus rubecula is the scientific name for the robin.
Copy and complete the table to show its full classification
(2 marks)
(3 marks)
Kingdom
Animalia
Figure 5 The domestic cat is also
related to lions, tigers and leopards, but
not as closely as the jungle cat. All these
cats belong to the family Felidae
Chordata
Class
Order
Aves
Passeriformes
Muscicapidae
Family
Genus
Species
Study tip
4 The loganberry (Rubus loganobaccus) is the fertile offspring
of the blackberry (Rubus ursinus) and the raspberry (Rubus
idaeus). Explain why the loganberry is difficult to classify into
a taxonomic group.
(3 marks)
As an organism's scientific name
may be long or difficult to pronounce,
the genus name is often shortened to
the first letter after the first mention
in full. For example, baker's yeast,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is often
shortened to S. cerevisiae and the
bacterium Escherichia coli to E. coli.
234
10.6 Representing variation graphically
To work out the statistical strength of the correlation, the value Synoptic link
should be looked up in the correlation coefficient critical value
You will learn how to calculate
tables. Some tables refer to the number of data pairs (n); others ask
degrees of freedom in Topic 20.4,
you to calculate the degrees of freedom (df). The tables you will be
Phenotypic ratios.
using for your Spearman's rank correlation coefficient use n.
Then look at the probability values for this number of data pairs. As before, for the data to be
considered significantly different from chance alone, the probability must be 5% (0.05) or less - a
certainty of 95% or more.
1 - Tail
test
5%
21%
1%
2 - Tail
test
10%
5%
1%
p=0.1
p = 0.05
p=0.01
4
1.000
...
5
0.900
1.000
6
0.829
0.886
1.000
7
0.714
0.786
0.929
8
0.643
0.738
0.881
9
0.600
0.700
0.833
10
0.564
0.648
0.794
11
0.536
0.618
0.755
12
0.503
0.587
0.727
In this case the value of 0.851 is far to the right of p = 0.01 - therefore, we can say that the correlation
is >99% certain. As the correlation is positive, we can conclude that the greater the petiole length, the
greater the leaf width.
Summary questions
1 Sort the following list into those characteristics which show continuous
variation and those which show discontinuous variation: (2 marks)
a the presence in humans of lobed or lobeless ears
b the size of an E.coli bacterium
c the height of a group of seedlings, planted for a germination experiment
d the number of spots present on a ladybird.
2 Describe the differences between the genetic and
environmental control of characteristics that show
discontinuous and continuous variation.
(4 marks)
3 Explain why a mean value should not normally be calculated
for a characteristic showing discontinuous variation.
(2 marks)
Describe the pattern of variation that would be seen if the
body mass of all wild rabbits was measured.
(4 marks)
The following data was collected from a student's
e fieldwork study:
Diameter of rose bush
1 2 3 5 8
stem/mm
Number of thorns per unit
8 11 9 12 12
length
10
11
14
27
23
30
a Calculate the Spearman's ranked correlation coefficient for
this set of data
(6 marks)
b Evaluate the strength of the correlation calculated in part (a) (3 marks)
258
10
CLASSIFICATION AND
EVOLUTION
10.1 Classification
Specification reference: 4.2.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the taxonomic hierarchy
of biological classification
of species
the binomial system of
naming species and the
advantage of such a system.
No one knows how many different types of organism currently
exist on the Earth. Through studying evolutionary relationships and
performing mathematical calculations, in 2011 a team of scientists
from the UK, USA, and Canada arrived at a widely accepted estimate
of 8.7 million. However, the vast majority of these organisms have
not been identified, and cataloguing them all could take more than
1000 years. The team also warned that many species would become
extinct before they were studied.
Classification systems
Classification is the name given to the process by which living
organisms are sorted into groups. The organisms within each group
share similar features.
Kingdom
phylum phylum phylum phylum phylum phylum phylum
class
class
class
class
class
A number of different classification systems exist. Until
recently the most widely used system contained seven groups
ordered in a hierarchy – these are referred to as taxonomic
groups. The seven groups are: kingdom, phylum (plural
phyla), class, order, family, genus (plural genera) and
species (Figure 1). Kingdoms are the biggest and broadest
taxonomic group, with species being the smallest and
most specific classification. Similar or related groups at one
hierarchical level are combined into more inclusive groups at
the next higher level.
order
order
order
order
order
family
family
family
family
family
genus
genus genus
species species species
Hierarchical classification systems are often referred to as
A Figure 1 This diagram shows how the seven
Linnaean classification, after the 19th century Swedish
taxonomic groups are arranged into a hierarchy. botanist, Carl Linnaeus who was the first to propose such
An organism can only belong to one group at
a system.
each level of the hierarchy
Based on recent studies of genetic material many scientists now add
a further level of classification into the hierarchy. It is known as a
domain (you will find out more about the three domain system
of classification in Topic 10.2, The five kingdoms). This level of
classification is placed at the top of the hierarchy. As new scientific
discoveries are made (for example, through genome sequencing), the
current system of classification may change again.
230
10
10.4 Evidence for evolution
Palaeontology
Fossils are formed when animal and plant remains are preserved in
rocks. Over long periods of time, sediment is deposited on the earth
to form layers (strata) of rock. Different layers correspond to different
geological eras, the most recent layer being found on the top. Within
the different rock strata the fossils found are quite different, forming a
sequence from oldest to youngest, which shows that organisms have
gradually changed over time. This is known as the fossil record.
Evidence provided by the fossil record:
Fossils of the simplest organisms such as bacteria and simple
algae are found in the oldest rocks, whilst fossils of more complex
organisms such as vertebrates are found in more recent rocks. This
supports the evolutionary theory that simple life forms gradually
evolved over an extremely long time period into more complex ones.
The sequence in which the organisms are found matches their
ecological links to each other. For example, plant fossils appear
before animal fossils. This is consistent with the fact that animals
require plants to survive.
By studying similarities in the anatomy of fossil organisms,
scientists can show how closely related organisms have evolved
from the same ancestor. For example zebras and horses, members
of the genus Equus, are closely related to the rhinoceros of
the family Rhinocerotidae. An extensive fossil record of these
organisms exists, which spans over 60 million years and links
them to the common ancestor Hyracotherium. This lineage has
been based on structural similarities between their skull
(including teeth) and skeleton, in particular the feet (Figure 4).
Fossils allow relationships between extinct and living (extant)
organisms to be investigated.
A Figure 4 You may be surprised to
learn that bacteria can become fossils.
The cyanobacteria (blue-green algae)
have left behind a fossil record. The
oldest cyanobacteria-like fossils known
are nearly 3.5 billion years old, among
the oldest fossils currently known
The fossil record is, however, not complete. For example, many
organisms are soft-bodied and decompose quickly before they have a
chance to fossilise. The conditions needed for fossils to form are not
often present. Many other fossils have been destroyed by the Earth's
movements, such as volcanoes, or still lie undiscovered.
Hippomorpha
one toe per foot
Equidae
Equus
(includes horses
and zebras)
Perissodactyla
mammals with hooves, odd
number of toes on rear feet
(inlcudes Hyracotherium)
Tapirdae
short prehensile
tail
Tapirus
(includes mountain
and Baird's tapirs )
Ceratomorpha
more than one
toe per foot
Rhinocerotidae
large keratin
horn(s)
Rhinoceros
(includes black
and white rhinos)
Figure 5 This evolutionary tree shows that zebras and horses are closely
related to the rhinoceros
244
10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
available would survive longer than a bird whose beak was less suited.
Therefore, it would have more offspring, passing on its characteristic
beak. Over time the finch population on that island would all share
this characteristic.
Throughout his trip Darwin sent specimens of organisms back to the
UK for other scientists to preserve and classify. This enabled scientists
not only to see specimens first hand but also enabled them to spot
characteristics and links between organisms that Darwin had not.
For example, Darwin did not notice that the tortoises (which the
Galapagos islands are named after) present on different islands were
different subspecies. Before this was pointed out to him he had simply
stacked their shells randomly in the hold.
Upon his return to England, Darwin spent many years developing
ideas. He also carried out experimental breeding of pigeons to gain
direct evidence that his ideas might work.
At the same time as Darwin was developing his ideas, another
scientist, Alfred Wallace, was working on his own theory of evolution
in Borneo. In 1858 he sent his ideas to Darwin for peer review before
its publication. As Wallace's ideas were so similar to Darwin's, they
proposed the theory of evolution through a joint presentation of two
scientific papers to the Linnean Society of London on 1st July 1858.
A year later in 1859, Darwin published 'On the Origin of Species'. It was in
this book that he named the theory that he and Wallace had presented
independently as the theory of evolution by natural selection (see
Topic 10.7, Adaptations).
The book was extremely controversial at the time. The theory of
evolution conflicted with the religious view that God had created all
of the animals and plants on Earth in their current form, and only
about six thousand years ago. A further implication of Darwin's theory
is that humans are simply a type of animal evolved from apes, which
conflicted with the widely held Christian belief that God created 'man'
in his own image.
Darwin's theory split the scientific community before his idea became
generally agreed. Darwin's theory of evolution is now widely accepted,
however, even today, debate with religious groups continues.
Evidence for evolution
Scientists use a number of sources to study the process of evolution.
These include:
palaeontology - the study of fossils and the fossil record
comparative anatomy - the study of similarities and differences
between organisms' anatomy
comparative biochemistry - similarities and differences between
the chemical makeup of organisms.
A Figure 3 One of the most common
fossils found in the UK is an ammonite,
an organism that lived in the sea.
These organisms became extinct about
65 million years ago. Radioisotope
dating is used to determine the age of
the rock strata and the fossils found
within the layer
243
10
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
(6) Worked example – Using Spearman's rank correlation coefficient to compare ivy
leaves' petiole length and leaf width
The correlation coefficient is calculated using the following formula:
6502
p=1-
n(n? - 1)
where:
p = correlation coefficient
E = the sum (total) of
d= difference in ranks
n = number of pairs of data
The group of students next wanted to find out if the petiole length of the ivy was related to the width
of an ivy leaf. They took a sample of 10 ivy leaves from the north facing side of the stump. The data
they collected is shown below.
Sample Number 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 10
Petiole length/mm 28 58 57 59 27 59 44 54 79 63
Leaf width/mm 38 66 64 66 30 65 48 54 78 62
The data for the two variables should be rank ordered, from lowest to highest. Using a table can help
to make manipulating the data more straightforward.
Where identical values exist, the 'average rank' should be used. So, if two equal values appear at
rank 5, both are assigned the rank 5.5 (between ranks 5 and 6).
leaf
width/mm
Rank: leaf
petiole
length /mm
28
58
Rank: petiole
length
2
Rank
differenced
38
2
66
o
8.5
-2.5
6.25
64
u
59
66
7.5
27
30
1
59
65
7.5
0.25
44
48
54
54
mto
OO
79
78
63
62
16
d? = 24.5
6202
Substituting values from the table:
LAS (6 x 24.5)
n(112 – 1) 10 % (102 - 1)
where:
p=l_
351
1990)
An r value of +1 shows a perfect positive correlation.
An I value of -1 shows a perfect negative correlation
An r value of O shows no correlation
Therefore in this example, petiole length and leaf width show an excellent correlation.
257
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
NO EVOLUTION
10
Comparative anatomy
As the fossil record is incomplete, scientists look for other sources
of evidence to determine evolutionary relationships. Comparative
anatomy is the study of similarities and differences in the anatomy
of different living species.
mole
Homologous structures
A homologous structure is a structure that appears superficially
different (and may perform different functions) in different organisms,
but has the same underlying structure. An example is the pentadactyl
limb of vertebrates.
horse
Vertebrate limbs are used for a wide variety of functions such as running,
jumping, and flying. You would expect the bone structure of these
limbs in a flying vertebrate to be very different from that in a walking
vertebrate or a swimming vertebrate. However, the basic structures of
all vertebrate limbs are actually very similar (Figure 6) - the same bones
are adapted to carry out the whole range of different functions. An
explanation is that all vertebrates have evolved from a common ancestor,
therefore vertebrate limbs have all evolved from the same structure.
porpoise
bat
The presence of homologous structures provides evidence for
divergent evolution. This describes how, from a common ancestor,
different species have evolved, each with a different set of adaptive
features. This type of evolution will occur when closely related
species diversify to adapt to new habitats as a result of migration or
loss of habitat.
human
Comparative biochemistry
Comparative biochemistry is the study of similarities and differences
in the proteins and other molecules that control life processes. Although
these molecules can change over time, some important molecules are
A Figure 6 These are the pentadactyl
limbs from a number of organisms
(not to scale). Scientists believe that
their function has altered as a result of
evolution from a common ancestor. The
changes in bone structures of organisms
living in the past can be studied through
the fossil record
Evolutionary embryology
Evolu
DOSSOS
(1395993
Embryology is the study of embryos. It is another source
of evidence to show evolutionary relationships. An
embryo is an unborn (or unhatched) animal in its earliest
phases of development. Embryos of many different
animals look very similar and it is often difficult to tell
them apart. This shows that the animals develop in a
similar way, implying that the processes of embryonic
development have a common origin and the animals
share common ancestry but have gradually evolved
different traits.
A Figure 7 Darwin used Haeckel's
drawings of embryos as evidence
for evolution
Many traits of one type of animal appear in the embryo
of another type of animal. For example, fish, and human
embryos both have gill slits. In fish these develop into
gills, but in humans they disappear before birth.
Darwin considered the evidence from embryology to be
'by far the strongest single class of facts in favour of
his theory. He studied a series of drawings produced
245
CLASSIFICATION AND EVOLUTION
10
The development of classification systems oo
1 Explain why the classification system we use
today is different from the one originally proposed
by Aristotle around the year 350 BC.
The system of classification of living organisms
provides a good example of how our scientific
knowledge and understanding has developed over time,
as new information is gathered or discovered. Advances
in scientific techniques have provided more detailed
information on the genetic and biological make up of
organisms, which has led to several revisions in the
way organisms are classified. Our current system of
classification may well change in the future, as further
discoveries are made.
Some of the key steps in the development of the current
system of classification are shown here:
Konrad Gesner, a
Swiss botanist,
produces a four
volume
encyclopaedia
of the then-known
animal world,
consisting of over
4500 pages
Ernst Haeckel, a
German biologist
and naturalist,
proposes the third
kingdom of
protoctista,
in addition to
Linnaeus' animal
and plant kingdoms
Following genetic
analysis, Carl Woese
introduces the six
kingdom
classification model,
sub-dividing the
prokaryotes into
archaebacteria and
eubacteria
1551
1866
1977
350 BC
1758
1969
Aristotle compiles
his book 'A history
of animals', the
first comprehensive
study of animals
Carl Linnaeus
publishes the tenth
edition of his book
Systema Naturae,
now considered the
starting point of
binomial nomenclature
A five kingdom
classification system
is proposed by Robert
Whittaker, consisting
of prokaryotae,
protoctista, fungi,
plantae, and animalia
Why do scientists classify organisms?
• To identify species - by using a clearly defined system of classification,
the species an organism belongs to can be easily identified.
To predict characteristics – if several members in a group have a
specific characteristic, it is likely that another species in the group
will have the same characteristic.
To find evolutionary links - species in the same group probably share
characteristics because they have evolved from a common ancestor.
By using a single classification system, scientists worldwide can
share their research. Links between different organisms can be seen,
even if they live on different continents. Remember, though, that
classification systems have been created to order observed organisms.
This form of hierarchical organisation is not defined by 'nature'.
231
10
10.1 Classification
How are organisms classified?
The classification system begins by separating organisms into the
three domains - Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya (discussed further in
Topic 10.2, The five kingdoms). These are the broadest groups. As you
move down the hierarchy there are more groups at each level, but
fewer organisms in each group. The organisms in each group become
more similar and share more of the same characteristics.
The system ends with organisms being classified as individual species.
These are the smallest units of classification - each group contains only
one type of organism. A species is defined as a group of organisms
that are able to reproduce to produce fertile offspring. For example,
donkeys can reproduce with other donkeys, the offspring of which can
subsequently breed. Likewise, horses can breed with other horses to
produce fertile offspring. However, when a horse is bred with a donkey,
the offspring produced (a mule or a hinny) is infertile. Therefore,
donkeys and horses are classified as belonging to different species.
Mules or hinnies are not a species.
Synoptic link
You learnt about meiosis in Topic
6.3, Meiosis.
Mules and hinnies are infertile because their cells contain an odd number
of chromosomes (63). This means that meiosis and gamete production
cannot take place correctly as all chromosomes must pair up. This
chromosome number is created because horses have 64 chromosomes
(32 pairs) whereas donkeys have 62 chromosomes (31 pairs).
Study tip
Do not confuse viable offspring
with fertile offspring. Viable means
the organism produced survives,
but does not mean that it is
capable of producing offsping.
Figure 2 Mules (left) are produced by crossing a horse (Equus caballus, middle) and a
donkey (Equus asinus, right). Because a mule is infertile, it is not classified as a species.
To show how the system works, the classification of three organisms is
given in Table 1.
Table 1 Classification of three organisms, you do not need to learn these examples
Level of hierarchy
European badger
Brewer's yeast
Eukaryote
English oak tree
Eukaryote
Domain
Eukaryote
Kingdom
Fungi
Plantae
Animalia
Phylum
Ascomycota
Angiosperms
Chordata
Mammalia
Class
Saccharomycetes
Eudicots
Order
Saccharomycetales
Fagales
Carnivora
Family
Saccharomycetaceae
Fagaceae
Mustelidae
Genus
Quercus
Meles
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
Species
robur
meles
232
10
10.4 Evidence for evolution
by biologist Ernst Haeckel that depicted the growth
of embryos from various classes of vertebrates. The
pictures show that the embryos begin looking virtually
identical (suggesting common ancestry), but as they
develop, their appearances diverge to take the form of
their particular group.
As new organs or structures evolved, these features
develop at the end of an organism's embryonic
development. As a result, an organism's evolutionary
history can be traced in the development of its embryos.
1 Explain whether embryos could form part of the
fossil record.
Synoptic link
You learnt about ribosomal RNA
and its role in protein synthesis in
Topic 3.10, Protein synthesis.
highly conserved (remain almost unchanged) among species. Slight
changes that occur in these molecules can help identify evolutionary
links. Two of the most common molecules studied are cytochrome c, a
protein involved in respiration, and ribosomal RNA.
Synoptic link
As well as using DNA to demonstrate
evolutionary relationships it can
also be used for other things. You
will learn more examples of this in
Topic 21.1, DNA profiling.
The hypothesis of neutral evolution states that most of the variability in
the structure of a molecule does not affect its function. This is because
most of the variability occurs outside of the molecule's functional
regions. Changes that do not affect a molecule's function are called
'neutral'. Since they have no effect on function, their accumulation
is not affected by natural selection. As a result, neutral substitutions
occur at a fairly regular rate, although that rate is different for different
molecules.
To discover how closely two species are related, the molecular sequence
of a particular molecule is compared. (Scientists do this by looking at
the order of DNA bases, or at the order of amino acids in a protein.)
The number of differences that exist are plotted against the rate the
molecule undergoes neutral base pair substitutions (which has been
determined through studies). From this information scientists can
estimate the point at which the two species last shared a common
ancestor. Species that are closely related have the more similar DNA
and proteins, whereas those that are distantly related have far fewer
similarities. Ribosomal RNA has a very slow rate of substitution, so
it is commonly used together with fossil information to determine
relationships between ancient species.
Summary questions
1 Describe what is shown on a phylogenetic tree.
(2 marks)
2 Describe two advantages and two disadvantages of using
the fossil record as a source of evidence for evolution.
Figure 8 Humans and chimpanzees
have very similar DNA sequences. They
have been found to share at least 98%
of their DNA. This provides evidence that
chimpanzees are humans' closest living
relatives
(4 marks)
3 Describe how the work of three scientists was used
in the development of the theory of evolution.
(6 marks)
4 Explain how comparative biochemistry provides evidence
of evolution.
(3 marks)
246
