16
PLANT RESPONSES
High concentrations of auxins suppress the growth of lateral
shoots. This results in apical dominance. Growth in the main shoot
is stimulated by the auxin produced at the tip so it grows quickly.
The lateral shoots are inhibited by the hormone that moves back
down the stem, so they do not grow very well. Further down the
stem, the auxin concentration is lower and so the lateral shoots
grow more strongly. There is a lot of experimental evidence for the
role of auxins in apical dominance. For example, if the apical shoot
is removed, the auxin-producing cells are removed and so there is
no auxin. As a result, the lateral shoots, freed from the dominance
of the apical shoot, grow faster. If auxin is applied artificially to the
cut apical shoot, apical dominance is reasserted and lateral shoot
growth is suppressed.
Low concentrations of auxins promote
root growth. Up to a given concentration,
active
the more auxin that reaches the roots, the
apical bud
more they grow. Auxin is produced by the
dormant
root tips and auxin also reaches the roots lateral bud v
in low concentrations from the growing
shoots. If the apical shoot is removed, then
the amount of auxin reaching the roots is
greatly reduced and root growth slows and
stops. Replacing the auxin artificially at the
cut apical shoot restores the growth of the
with apical bud in place with apical bud removed
roots. High auxin concentrations inhibit root
Figure 6 Apical dominance affects the form of a plant and can
growth.
clearly be seen in conifers
Gibberellins
As you have learnt, gibberellins are involved
apical bud
lateral bud
in the germination of seeds. They are also
important in the elongation of plant stems
root
during growth. Gibberellins affect the length
of the internodes – the regions between
the leaves on a stem. Gibberellins were
discovered because they are produced by a
auxin concentration
fungus from the genus Gibberella that affects
rice. The infected seedlings grew extremely
tall and thin. Scientists investigated the rice
and isolated chemicals - gibberellins - which
produce the same spindly growth in the
plants. It was then discovered that plants
Figure 7 Different concentrations of hormones affect different
themselves produce the same compounds. tissues in different ways - the graph shows the effect of auxin on
Plants that have short stems produce few or roots, lateral buds, and apical buds
no gibberellins. There are well over a hundred
different naturally produced gibberellins. Scientists have bred many Synoptic link
dwarf varieties of plants where the gibberellin synthesis pathway is
You learnt about the use of
interrupted. Without gibberellins the plant stems are much shorter.
standard deviation to measure
This reduces waste and also makes the plants less vulnerable to
the spread of data in Topic 10.6,
damage by weather and harvesting.
Representing variation graphically.
stimulation
inhibition
II
443
16
PLANT RESPONSES
Pheromones
A pheromone is a chemical made by an organism which affects the
social behaviour of other members of the same species. Because
plants do not behave socially, they do not rely a lot on pheromones.
There are a few instances where they could be regarded as using
pheromones to defend themselves:
If a maple tree is attacked by insects, it releases a pheromone which
is absorbed by leaves on other branches. These leaves then make
chemicals such as callose to help protect them if they are attacked.
Scientists have observed that leaves on the branches of nearby trees
also prepare for attack in response to these chemical signals.
Figure 3 Human uses for some of the
compounds produced by plants
There is some evidence that plants communicate by chemicals
produced in the root systems and one plant can tell' a neighbour
if it is under water stress.
However, plants do produce chemicals called volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) which act rather like pheromones between themselves and
other organisms, particularly insects. They diffuse through the air in and
around the plant. Plants use these chemical signals to defend themselves
in some amazing ways. They are usually only made when the plant
detects attack by an insect pest through chemicals in the saliva of the
insect. This may elicit gene switching. For example:
When cabbages are attacked by the caterpillars of the cabbage white
butterfly, they produce a chemical signal which attracts the parasitic
wasp Cotesia glomerata. This insect lays its eggs in the caterpillars which
are then eaten alive, protecting the plant. The signal from the plant
also deters any other female cabbage white butterflies from laying
their eggs. Scientists estimate up to 90% of cabbage white caterpillars
are affected by the parasite. If the cabbage is attacked by the mealy
cabbage greenfly, it sends out a different signal which attracts the
parasitic wasp Diaretiella rapae which only attacks greenfly.
When apple trees are attacked by spider mites, they produce VOCs
which attract predatory mites that come and destroy the apple
tree pests.
Figure 4 Foxgloves produce a
chemical, digitalis, which is toxic to
mammals - it slows the heart rate. It
also contains chemicals which cause
vomiting, so after eating a foxglove leaf
a small mammal will feel very ill but
then vomit, removing the toxins. Digitalis
can kill people too, but drugs based
on the chemical are also used to treat
human heart problems and save lives
Some types of wheat seedling produce VOCs when they have been
attacked by aphids and these repel other aphids from the plant.
Sometimes a VOC produced by a plant that has been attacked will
not only attract predators of the pest organism - it may also act as a
'pheromone' so that neighbouring plants begin to produce the VOC
before they are actually attacked.
Folding in response to touch
Most plants, with the exception of a few insectivorous plants such as
the Venus fly trap, move so slowly you cannot follow the movement
with the naked eye. It is revealed over hours or days, or by time-lapse
photography. There are, however, some exceptions – the sensitive
plant Mimosa pudica is one of a small number of plants which move
at a speed you can see. This plant uses conventional defences against
herbivores - it contains a toxic alkaloid and the stem has sharp prickles,
449
16
16.3 Plant responses to herbivory
but if the leaves are touched, they fold down and collapse. Scientists
think this frightens off larger herbivores, and dislodges small insects
which have landed on the leaves. The leaf falls in a few seconds, and
recovers over 10-12 minutes as a result of potassium ion movement
into specific cells, followed by osmotic water movement. The exact
causes of the dramatic change in the leaves are still being researched.
T
Mimosa pudica - nerves and muscles in plants
central vascular
core
flexor side
flexor side
The dramatic leaf-folding in response to touch
seen in Mimosa pudica seems to be the result of
chemical changes in some large, fairly thin-walled
cells found at the bases of the leaves and the
individual leaflets. These special cells have relatively
elastic walls and they surround a vascular bundle to
form a thickened region called a pulvinus, which acts
rather like a joint (Figure 5). The cells at the top are
the flexor region and the cells at the bottom are the
extensor region.
extensor side
extensor side
relaxed state
bending
pulvinus relaxed
pulvinus flexed
and extended
and bent
A Figure 5 The structure of a pulvinus when extended and
flexed. The best current model for the cellular basis of the
rapid folding response of Mimosa pudica to touch
When the leaf is touched, scientists think there is an
electrochemical change in the cells which results in
something rather like the action potential in nerve
cells which causes the active movement of potassium
ions into the cells on the upper, flexor side of the
pulvinus, while potassium ions are similarly moved
out of cells on the lower, extensor side. Water follows
the potassium ions by osmosis, so turgor in the top
cells increases and in the lower cells decreases.
There are elastic tissues in the cells that increase
this effect. They include actin, one of the proteins
found in mammalian muscle cells. As a result the
leaflet, or whole leaf, bends down. When the plant
recovers the situation is reversed - potassium ions
return to their resting levels down concentration
and electrochemical gradients and water follows by
osmosis. (Figure 6).
2 min
3 min
4 min
6 min
12 min
A Figure 6 The change in angle of pulvinus during recovery
The initial leaf folding of Mimosa pudica takes seconds
but recovery takes 10-12 minutes. Both involve similar
changes in potassium levels. Suggest why such different
rates of change may have evolved.
Summary questions
1 What is herbivory?
(1 mark)
2 Describe two examples of chemical defences against
herbivory by animals, explaining how they protect the
plant and how they are used by people. (5 marks)
3 a Why are the chemicals sometimes known as plant
pheromones not strictly pheromones? (2 marks)
b Why is it so important that these chemicals are
volatile?
(2 marks)
Give two examples of how these chemicals may be
used to protect a plant against herbivory, including
a discussion as to whether your examples are
pheromones or not.
(6 marks)
450
16
16.1 Plant hormones and growth in plants
Investigating the effect of hormones on plant growth
There are many different ways to investigate the effect
1 Suggest an advantage and a disadvantage of
of plant hormones on the growth of the shoots, the roots,
using serial dilutions of hormones in nutrient
and the germination of seeds. These include growing
solution to investigate the effect of a hormone
seedlings hydroponically (in nutrient solution rather than
on plant growth.
soil) in serial dilutions of different hormones, or applying
2 An experiment was conducted to investigate using
different concentrations of hormones to the cut ends of
plant hormones to increase the growth of cuttings.
stems or roots and observing the effects.
It was found that in the first experiment there
In most experiments, it is important to make serial
was a significant increase (p < 0.05) in fresh
dilutions to observe the effects of different concentrations
weight with potting medium 2, and leaf length with
of the hormones, as they can have different effects on
potting medium 1, both at 100 mg/LTAA. Explain
growth at different concentrations.
the meaning of the term significant increase
(p < 0.05) and explain how it can be calculated.
Experiments investigating the effect of hormones on plant
growth usually involve large numbers of plants. When you
have completed your measurements, the spread of data
from each experimental group should be measured using
standard deviation.
Synoptic link
You learnt about serial dilutions
in Topic 4.2, Factors affecting
enzyme activity.
Synergism and antagonism
Most plant hormones do not work on their own but by interacting
with other substances. In doing so, very fine control over the responses
of the plant can be achieved. If different hormones work together,
complementing each other and giving a greater response than they would
on their own, the interaction is known as synergism. If the substances
have opposite effects, for example one promoting growth and one
inhibiting it, the balance between them will determine the response
of the plant. This is known as antagonism. Our knowledge of plant
hormones and the mechanisms by which they have an effect is still far
from complete - this is an active and important area of research.
Summary questions
1 Why are chemicals so important in coordinating the growth
of plants?
(3 marks)
2 a Give three examples of plant hormones and for each give
one function in the plant.
b Why are the chemicals you have listed in answer
2a described as plant hormones?
(3 marks)
(3 marks)
3 Plant hormones have very different effects on different plant tissues.
a Give an example with experimental evidence.
(6 marks)
b Explain the importance of these multifunction hormones
in a plant.
(2 marks)
4 Explain how the data in Figure 5 appear to confirm our
current model of auxin action.
(6 marks)
444
16
16.4 Tropisms in plants
to unilateral light that only shines from one side, then the shoots of
the plant will grow towards that light and the roots, if exposed, will
grow away. Shoots are said to be positively phototropic and roots are
negatively phototropic. This response has an obvious survival value for
a plant. It helps to ensure that the shoots receive as much all-round
light as possible, allowing the maximum amount of photosynthesis
to take place. Also, if the roots should emerge from the soil - as they
might do after particularly heavy rain, for example - they will rapidly
turn back to the soil.
Expt no.
Method
Result
Explanation
unilateral
light
shoot bends
towards light
The shoot is positively phototropic. Bending
occurs behind the tip.
plant
shoot
shoot tip
removed
light
tip
no response
The tip must either detect the stimulus or produce
the messenger (or both) as its removal prevents
any response.
discarded
lightproof
cover is
placed
over intact
tip of shoot
The light stimulus must be detected by the tip.
light
no response
thin, impermeable
barrier of mica
movement of
chemical
down shaded
side
Mica on the illuminated side of the shoot allows
the hormone to pass only down the shaded side
where it increases growth and causes bending.
light
bends towards
the light
mica inserted
on shaded
movement of
chemical down
shaded side is
prevented by mica
side
light
no response
tip removed,
gelatin block
inserted and
tip replaced
movement of
chemical down
shaded side
As gelatin allows chemicals to pass through it,
but not electrical messages, the bending which
occurs must be due to a chemical passing from
the tip.
light
gelatin block
bends towards
the light
A Figure 1 Experimental observations such as these by Darwin and Boysen-Jensen are the basis of our understanding
of phototropisms. Darwin's experiments helped to show that it is the tips of shoots which are the source of the phototropic
response, meanwhile Boysen-Jensen helped show the nature of the 'messenger'in the phototropic response
452
16
16.2 Plant responses to abiotic stress
latent bud
leaf petiole
Abcission or leaf fall
After a summer of long days, short nights, and warm temperatures,
the nights lengthen, days shorten, and temperatures fall as autumn
develops. The lengthening of the dark period triggers a number of
changes, including abscission or leaf fall and a period of dormancy
during the winter months.
separation zone
protective layer
abscission zone
The falling light levels result in falling concentrations of auxin. The
leaves respond to the falling auxin concentrations by producing the
gaseous plant hormone ethene. At the base of the leaf stalk is a region
called the abscission zone, made up of two layers of cells sensitive
to ethene. Ethene seems to initiate gene switching in these cells
resulting in the production of new enzymes. These digest and weaken
the cell walls in the outer layer of the abscission zone, known as the
separation layer.
vascular
tissue
Figure 1 The abscission layer in a
leaf stalk
The vascular bundles which carry materials into and out of the leaf
are sealed off. At the same time fatty material is deposited in the cells
on the stem side of the separation layer. This layer forms a protective
scar when the leaf falls, preventing the entry of pathogens. Cells deep
in the separation zone respond to hormonal cues by retaining water
and swelling, putting more strain on the already weakened outer
layer. Then further abiotic factors such as low temperatures or strong
autumn winds finish the process - the strain is too much and the leaf
separates from the plant. A neat, waterproof scar is left behind.
A Figure 2 The scar where a leaf has
fallen from this horse chestnut twig
is clear to see, including the dark dots
which are the sealed ends of the xylem
and phloem vessels
Preventing freezing
Another major abiotic factor which affects plants is a decrease in
temperature. If cells freeze, their membranes are disrupted and they
will die. Many plants, however, have evolved mechanisms that protect
their cells in freezing conditions. The cytoplasm of the plant cells and
the sap in the vacuoles contain solutes which lower the freezing point.
Some plants produce sugars, polysaccharides, amino acids, and even
proteins which act as antifreeze to prevent the cytoplasm from freezing,
or protect the cells from damage even if they do freeze.
Most species only produce the chemicals which make them hardy
and frost resistant during the winter months. It appears that different
genes are suppressed and activated in response to a sustained fall
in temperatures along with a reduction in day length, effectively
preparing the plants to withstand frosty conditions. A sustained spell
of warm weather along with extended day length reverses these
changes in the spring.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the mechanism of
opening and closing the stomata
as a result of turgor changes in
Topic 9.3, Transpiration.
Stomatal control
As you have already learnt, heat and water availability are major
abiotic stresses for plants. One of the major ways in which plants can
respond to these stresses is to open the stomata to cool the plant as
water evaporates from the cells in the leaves in transpiration, or to
close the stomata to conserve water.
446
16.2 Plant responses to abiotic stress
Specification reference: 5.1.5
When the environmental conditions around plants change, they
have to cope or die. Abiotic stresses include changes in day length,
cold and heat, lack of water, excess water, high winds, and changes
in salinity. Plants need to be able to cope with these changes. As
you have already learnt, plant responses involve both physical and
physiological adaptations. They may have very thick cuticles, hairy
leaves, sunken stomata or a wilting response in hot, dry or extremely
windy conditions, or develop aerenchyma if they grow in an aquatic
environment.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the types of plant responses
► the roles of plant hormones.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the way plants
respond to very dry and to watery
conditions in Topic 9.5, Plant
adaptations to water availability.
Leaf loss in deciduous plants as a response
to abiotic stress
Plants that grow in temperate climates experience great
environmental changes during the year. For example, the range
of daylight hours in parts of northern Scotland ranges from
about 6.5 hours midwinter to just under 18.5 hours midsummer.
Temperatures vary as well – in England the mean temperature is
3-6°C in winter and 16-21°C in summer. As light and temperature
affect the rate of photosynthesis, seasonal changes have a big
impact on the amount of photosynthesis possible. The point comes
when the amount of glucose required for respiration to maintain
the leaves, and to produce chemicals from chlorophyll that might
protect them against freezing is greater than the amount of
glucose produced by photosynthesis. In addition, a tree that is in
leaf is more likely to be damaged or blown over by winter gales.
This means deciduous trees in temperate climates lose all of their
leaves in winter and remain dormant until the days lengthen and
temperatures rise again in spring.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
photosynthesis in Chapter 17,
Energy for biological processes.
Daylength sensitivity
Scientists have discovered that plants are sensitive to a lack of light
in their environment. This is known as photoperiodism. For many
years it was assumed that plants responded to the length of daylight,
but more recent evidence suggests that it is lack of light that is the
trigger for change. Many different plant responses are affected by the
photoperiod including the breaking of the dormancy of the leaf buds
so they open up, the timing of flowering in a plant and when tubers
are formed in preparation for overwintering.
The sensitivity of plants to day length (or dark length) results from a
light-sensitive pigment called phytochrome. This exists in two forms –
P. and P. Each absorbs a different type of light and the ratio of P to Por
changes depending on the levels of light.
445
16.4 Tropisms in plants
Specification reference: 5.1.5
Plant growth responses to stimuli from one direction are known as
tropisms. The growth of plants in response to light which comes from
one direction only is called phototropism; the response to gravity
is called geotropism; the response to chemicals chemotropism; and
to touch thigmotropism. Tropisms involve differential growth of
plant cells triggered by chemical messages produced in response to a
particular stimulus.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the types of plant responses
practical investigations
into phototropism and
geotropism.
Tropisms as a response to environmental cues
To be able to make the maximum use of the environmental
conditions, plants must grow and respond to variations in those
conditions. For example, once a seed begins to germinate in the soil,
the shoot and root must keep growing in the right direction if the
developing plant is to survive. The shoot must grow up towards the
light source for photosynthesis to take place. The roots must grow
downwards into the soil which will provide support, minerals, and
water for the plant. The movements of the root and shoot take place
in direct response to environmental stimuli. The direction of the
response is related to the direction from which the stimulus comes.
These responses are examples of tropisms.
Much of the research on tropisms uses germinating seeds and very
young seedlings. They are easy to work with and manipulate and
as they are growing and responding rapidly, any changes show up
quickly. Changes also tend to affect the whole organism rather than a
small part (as with a mature plant) and this makes any tropisms much
easier to observe and measure. The seedlings of monocotyledonous
plants - usually cereals such as oats and wheat - are most commonly
used as the shoot that emerges is a single spike with no apparent
leaves known as a coleoptile. It is easier to manipulate and observe
than a dicotyledonous shoot. However, coleoptiles are relatively simple
plant systems, so it is important to remember that the control of the
responses to light in an intact adult plant may be more complex.
Synoptic link
You learnt about dicotyledonous
plants in Topic 9.1, Transport
systems in dicotyledonous plants.
Phototropism
The basic model of the way plants respond to light as they grow was
based on experiments where shoots were kept entirely in the dark
or in full illumination. However, this is rarely the case in real life.
Phototropisms are the result of the movement of auxins across the
shoot or root if it is exposed to light that is stronger on one side than
the other.
If plants are grown in bright, all-round light in normal conditions
of gravity they grow more or less straight upwards. In even but low
light they will also grow straight upwards – in fact in these conditions
they will grow faster and taller than in bright light. If plants, however,
are exposed to light which is brighter on one side than another, or
451
16
PLANT RESPONSES
positively geotropic (grow towards gravitational pull). This adaptation
ensures that the roots grow down into the soil and the shoots grow up
to the light. Geotropisms are also known as gravitropisms.
Practical investigations into geotropisms
Figure 5 shows two ways in which geotropic responses
can be demonstrated. These basic techniques can be
adapted to investigate different aspects of the geotropic
response.
Alternatively, the seeds can be placed in petri dishes
stuck to the wall of the lab, and the dishes rotated
90° at intervals as the seedlings grow. A geotropic
response in the roots can be seen within about
two hours.
•
The geotropic response can be investigated in shoots
and roots using a rotating drum known as a clinostat.
The plants can be grown on a slowly rotating clinostat
(about four revolutions per hour) so the gravitational
stimulus is applied evenly to all sides of the plant -
and the root and in the dark) shoot grow straight.
Investigations into geotropisms are usually carried
out with the plants exposed to all round light or in the
dark. Suggest a reason for these conditions.
geotropism in shoots
geotropism in roots
direction
of turn
moist cotton wool
(top layer removed
for this diagram)
petri dish
result after 2 days
clinostat
A Figure 5 Simple investigations can demonstrate geotropisms in shoots (left) and roots (right)
Summary questions
1 a What is a tropism?
(1 mark)
bExplain what is meant by phototropisms and geotropisms. (2 marks)
c Describe the different phototropic and geotropic responses
in shoots and roots.
(2 marks)
2 Produce a flow diagram to explain the events which bring
about a phototropic response in a shoot.
(1 mark)
3 If a block of butter is used in Figure 1 instead of the gelatin block,
there is no response in the decapitated shoot. Explain how
this informs scientists that the message is water soluble. (5 marks)
Originally scientists thought geotropisms were the result of auxin
movements in response to gravity. Investigate current models
of how geotropisms occur and write a brief report.
(6 marks)
455
PLANT RESPONSES
16
Synoptic link
Plants produce chemicals which signal to other species – for example, to
protect themselves from attack by insect pests – and may communicate
with other plants. They also produce chemical defences against
herbivores. In plant responses, chemicals are essential.
You learnt about plant transport
systems in Chapter 9, Transport in
plants.
The growth of plants, from the germination of a seed to the long-term
growth of a tree, is controlled by plant hormones. You will look at the
different chemicals and their roles in isolation, but in fact the growth
and form of a plant are the result of the interaction of many different
hormonal and environmental factors.
Scientists are still unsure about the details of many plant responses.
There are a number of reasons for this. Plant hormones work at
very low concentrations, so isolating them and measuring changes
in concentrations is not easy. The multiple interactions between
the different chemical control systems also make it very difficult
for researchers to isolate the role of a single chemical in a specific
response.
A Figure 1 Plants' responses enable
them to grow and flower in almost every
land environment
Outlined are a number of key aspects of plant growth with the role of
hormones highlighted.
Synoptic link
Plant hormones and seed germination
For a plant to start growing, the seed must germinate.
When the seed absorbs water, the embryo is activated and begins
to produce gibberellins. They in turn stimulate the production of
enzymes that break down the food stores found in the seed. The
food store is in the cotyledons in dicot seeds and the endosperm
in monocot seeds. The embryo plant uses these food stores to
produce ATP for building materials so it can grow and break
out through the seed coat. Evidence suggests that gibberellins
switch on genes which code for amylases and proteases - the
digestive enzymes required for germination. There is also
evidence suggesting that another plant hormone, ABA, acts
as an antagonist to gibberellins (interferes with the action of
gibberellin), and that it is the relative levels of both hormones
which determine when a seed will germinate.
You learnt about the role of
cotyledons as food stores in
the seeds of dicotyledenous
plants in Topic 9.1, Transport
systems in dicotyledonous plants.
layer
containing
protein
acids-amylase
seed coat
proteinsam
starch -
maltose
maltose
glucose
Experimental evidence
Experimental evidence supporting the role of gibberellins in
the germination of seeds includes:
Mutant varieties of seeds have been bred which lack
the gene that enables them to make gibberellins. These
seeds do not germinate. If gibberellins are applied to the
seeds externally, they then germinate normally.
If gibberellin biosynthesis inhibitors are applied to
seeds, they do not germinate as they cannot make the
gibberellins needed for them to break dormancy. If the
inhibition is removed, or gibberellins are applied, the
seeds germinate.
gibberellin
made
here
starchy
food store
water-
embryo
root
Figure 2 The role of gibberellins in germination
441
16
16.1 Plant hormones and growth in plants
Plant hormones, growth, and apical
dominance
The growth of a plant shoot after a seed has germinated is
controlled by a number of plant hormones.
rate of c-amylase synthesis
(enzyme units per 120 min)
treated with
gibberellin
www
no gibberellin
treatment
OH
lo
5
15
duration of exposure to gibberellin (h)
Figure 3 The effect of gibberellins on the
synthesis of amylase, a starch-digesting enzyme,
in isolated tissue from barley seeds
Auxins
Auxins such as indoleacetic acid (IAA) are growth
stimulants produced in plants. Small quantities can have
powerful effects. They are made in cells at the tip of the
roots and shoots, and in the meristems. Auxins can move
down the stem and up the root both in the transport tissue
and from cell to cell. The effect of the auxin depends on
its concentration and any interactions it has with other
hormones. Auxins have a number of major effects on
plant growth.
They stimulate the growth of the main, apical shoot. Evidence
suggests that auxins affect the plasticity of the cell wall – the
presence of auxins means the cell wall stretches more easily.
Auxin molecules bind to specific receptor sites in the plant
cell membrane, causing a fall in the pH to about 5. This is the
optimum pH for the enzymes needed to keep the walls very
flexible and plastic. As the cells mature, auxin is destroyed. As
the hormone levels fall, the pH rises so the enzymes maintaining
plasticity become inactive. As a result, the wall becomes rigid and
more fixed in shape and size and the cells can no longer expand
and grow.
zone of cell
division
auxins synthesised in meristem cells
OOOO
7-7- 7- -
auxins diffuse away from tip
auxins bind to receptor sites
vacoules form and low
pH develops
zone of cell
elongation
pH
length
low pH of cell walls keeps them
flexible allowing cells to expand
as they absorb water. Vacuoles
get bigger + cell walls stretch
Hd
elongation /um
4.5 -IAA
large central vacuole formed.
Auxins destroyed by enzymes.
Cell walls become rigid.
No futher cell elongation is
possible
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
time/min
Figure 5 Graph to show the effect
of an external application of auxin on
pH levels in the cell walls and on shoot
growth
zone of cell
differentiation
Figure 4 The effect of auxin on apical shoot growth
442
16.5 The commercial use
of plant hormones
Specification reference: 5.1.5
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
► the commercial use of plant
hormones.
Plant hormones are involved in the control of many different aspects
of plant life, from germination of the seeds and growth of the stems
to ripening of the fruit and the fall of the leaves. As scientists have
unravelled more and more about the role of these fascinating chemicals
in the life of plants, people have developed a number of ways of using
plant hormones commercially in agriculture and horticulture.
concentration / arbitrary units
Control of ripening
The gaseous plant hormone ethene is involved in the
carbon dioxide
ripening of climacteric fruits. These are fruits that continue
production
to ripen after they have been harvested. Their ripening is
linked to a peak of ethene production triggering a series of
chemical reactions including a greatly increased respiration
rate. Climacteric fruits include bananas, tomatoes, mangoes,
ethene production
and avocados. Non-climacteric fruit (such as oranges,
strawberries, and watermelon) do not produce large
amounts of ethene and do not ripen much after picking.
0 + +
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 The effect of ethene on climacteric fruit can easily be seen if
days of ripening
part of a bunch of green bananas is put in a bag with a single
Figure 1 Graph to show the effect of ethene on ripe banana. The bunch with the ripe banana will ripen
respiration rate of ripening fruit
faster than the rest of the bunch, even if the temperature is
exactly the same in both cases. Ethene from the ripe banana
stimulates the rapid ripening of the green ones.
Ethene is widely used commercially in the production of perfectly ripe
climacteric fruit for greengrocers and supermarkets. These fruit are
harvested when they are fully formed but long before they are ripe,
and then cooled, stored, and transported. The unripe fruit is hard and
much less easily damaged during transport around the world than the
ripe versions. When the fruit are needed for sale, they are exposed to
ethene gas under controlled conditions. This ensures that each batch
of fruit ripens at the same rate and are all at the same stage to be put
on the shelves for sale to the public. This careful control of ripening
prevents a lot of wastage of fruit during transport, and increases the
time available for them to be sold.
Hormone rooting powders and micropropagation
Auxin affects the growth of both shoots and roots. Scientists have
discovered that the application of auxin to cut shoots stimulates the
production of roots. This makes it much easier to propagate new
plants from plant cuttings. A cutting is a small piece of the stem of a
plant, usually with some leaves on. If this is placed in compost or soil –
or even water – roots may eventually appear and a new plant forms.
Dipping the cut stem into hormone rooting powder increases the
456
PLANT RESPONSES
16.1 Plant hormones and growth
in plants
Specification reference: 5.1.5
People often regard plants as passive objects in the environment that
simply grow and sometimes flower. However, plants are dynamic systems,
not only photosynthesising and producing food but also responding to
their environment in many different ways. They have evolved to cope
with abiotic stresses such as lack of water, and they have a range of
adaptations to protect them against the attentions of herbivores. They also
show directional growth in response to environmental cues such as light
and gravity – these are known as tropisms.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the roles of plant hormones
the experimental evidence
for the role of auxins in the
control of apical dominance
the experimental evidence
for the role of gibberellin in
the control of stem elongation
and seed germination
practical investigations into
the effect of plant hormones
on growth.
Chemical coordination
Plants are multicellular organisms living in a complex and ever-
changing environment. The key limitations on plants are that they
are rooted - they are not mobile, and they do not have a rapidly
responding nervous system. They are, however, coordinated organisms
that show clear responses to their environment, communication
between cells, and even communication between different plants.
The timescales of most plant responses are slower than animal
responses, but they still respond as a result of complex chemical
interactions. Plants have evolved a system of hormones – chemicals
that are produced in one region of the plant and transported both
through the transport tissues and from cell to cell and have an effect in
another part of the plant. Important plant hormones include auxins,
gibberellins, abscisic acid (ABA), and ethene. These chemicals have a
wide range of functions within the plant.
Table 1 Some of the roles of plant hormones
Hormone
auxins
Some of their known roles in plants
control cell elongation, prevent leaf fall (abscission),
maintain apical dominance, involved in tropisms,
stimulate the release of ethene, involved in fruit ripening
gibberellin
cause stem elongation, trigger the mobilisation of food
stores in a seed at germination, stimulate pollen tube
growth in fertilisation
ethene
causes fruit ripening, promotes abscission in
deciduous trees
ABA (abscisic acid)
maintains dormancy of seeds and buds, stimulates
cold protective responses, for example, antifreeze
production, stimulates stomatal closing
440
16
16.4 Tropisms in plants
Practical investigations into phototropisms
There are many different ways to investigate
phototropisms. Some of them are listed here.
• Germinate and grow seedlings in different conditions
of dark, all-round light, and unilateral light. Observe,
measure, and record the patterns of growth. Time-
lapse photography can give a good record of the
changes as they take place.
Germinate and grow seedlings in unilateral light with
different colour filters to see which wavelengths of
light trigger the phototropic response.
Repeat some of the classic experiments (Figure 1) -
cover the tips of coleoptiles with foil, remove the tips
of some coleoptiles, place auxin-impregnated agar
jelly blocks or lanolin on decapitated coleoptiles, place
auxin-impregnated agar blocks on one side only of
decapitated coleoptiles.
A Figure 4 Experiments on phototropisms can be done
on dicot seedlings as well as coleoptiles - these cress
seedlings have been grown in all-round light, the dark, and
unilateral light from left to right respectively
Discuss potential advantages and disadvantages
of using new technology such as smart phones and
tablets in recording and displaying data in practical
investigations into phototropisms.
Growing in the dark
The fact that plants grow more rapidly in the dark than when they
are illuminated can at first seem illogical. If a plant, however, is in the
dark the biological imperative is to grow upwards rapidly to reach the
light to be able to photosynthesise. The seedlings that break through
the soil first will not have to compete with other seedlings for light.
Evidence suggests that it is gibberellins that are responsible for the
extreme elongation of the internodes when a plant is grown in the
dark. Once a plant is exposed to the light, a slowing of upwards
growth is valuable. Resources can be used for synthesising leaves,
strengthening stems, and overall growth. Scientists have demonstrated
that levels of gibberellin fall once the stem is exposed to light.
Gardeners sometimes use this response to 'force' growth in plants -
early rhubarb is famously grown in dark sheds in Yorkshire. The rapid
upward growth which takes place in a plant grown in the dark is
known as etiolation. Etiolated plants are thin and pale - because the
plant is deprived of light little chlorophyll develops in the leaves.
Geotropisms
Light is not the only thing to which plants are sensitive. Plants are also
sensitive to gravity, and the different responses of the roots and shoots
are very important in the control of plant growth.
In normal conditions, plants always receive a unilateral gravitational
stimulus – gravity always acts downwards. The response of plants
to gravity can be seen in the laboratory using seedlings placed on
their sides either in all-round light or in the dark. Shoots are usually
negatively geotropic (grow away from gravitational pull) and roots are
454
PLANT RESPONSES
16
The effect of unilateral light
Examples of the response of plants to unilateral light can be seen in
any garden or woodland. Where plants are partially shaded the shoots
grow towards the light and then grow on straight towards it. This
response appears to be the result of the way auxin moves within the
plant under the influence of light.
elongated lateral
cells movement
of auxin
apical
meristem
auxin
tip of
coleoptile
peripheral
cells in
shoot
light
Figure 2 shows that the side of a shoot exposed to
light contains less auxin than the side which is not
illuminated. It appears that light causes the auxin to
move laterally across the shoot, so there is a greater
concentration on the unilluminated side. This in turn
stimulates cell elongation and growth on the dark
side, resulting in observed growth towards the light.
Once the shoot is growing directly towards the light,
the unilateral stimulus is removed. The transport of
auxin stops and the shoot then grows straight towards
the light. The original theory was that light destroyed
the auxin, but this has been disproved by experiments
showing that the levels of auxin in shoots are much
the same regardless of whether they have been kept
in the dark or under unilateral illumination.
► movement of auxin
auxin
Note-auxin alone may not control
phototropic movement of coleoptiles
Figure 2 In unilateral light, auxin moves laterally across
the tip of the shoot away from the light. This stimulates
growth on the shady side, so the shoot grows asymmetrically
towards the light
intact
shoot
split
shoot
Shoots kept in the dark - total auxin
produced approximately the same
whether shoot split or not.
24.1
total auxin levels
Shoot in unilateral light - total auxin
produced approximately the same
whether shoot split or not.
26.2
23.4
total auxin levels
Shoot in unilateral light but
undivided - auxin accumulates
on the dark side and lower on the
lit side when the shoot is intact,
but when it is divided the auxin
concentration is approximately
the same both sides. This suggests
that normally auxin is transported
EG total auxin levels
across the shoot in unilateral light
31.0 12.5 23.0 24.7
from the lit side to the dark side.
Figure 3 Experiments such as these with maize coleoptiles help us to determine
what happens to auxin levels within a shoot illuminated by unilateral light
453
16
Chapter 16 Practice questions
Practice questions
1a Plant responses to environmental
changes are co-ordinated by plant growth
substances (plant hormones).
Explain why plants need to be able to
respond to their environment. (2 marks)
b The following investigation was carried
out into the effects of plant growth
substances on germination:
A large number of lettuce seeds was
divided into eight equal batches
Each batch of seeds was placed on
moist filter paper in a Petri dish and
given a different treatment.
The different treatments are shown in the
table. Each tick represents one of the eight
batches of seeds.
2
(i) Describe, with reference to the
graph, the effects of the plant growth
substances on the germination of
lettuce seeds.
(4 marks)
(ii) Explain how the plant hormones
have these effects.
(4 marks)
(iii) Explain why all the lettuce seeds
were kept at 25°C.
(2 marks)
(iv) State three variables, other than
temperature, that needed to be
controlled in the investigation.
(3 marks)
State two commercial uses of plant
growth substances.
(2 marks)
OCR F215 2010 (apart from 1b(ii))
Plants are able to respond to changes in their
environment.
(i) Describe two ways in which
hormones may alter a plants growth
in response to overcrowding by other
plants.
(4 marks)
OCR F215 2012
(ii) Suggest how hormones alter
the growth and morphology, or
growth and development of
a plant
(4 marks)
The growth and development of a fruit tree
is controlled by plant growth regulators.
The table shows the stages that occur as the
tree grows and develops and indicates the
stages at which giberellin is involved (green
shading).
treatment
concentration of gibberellin
(mol dm-3)
0.00 0.05 0.50 5.00
water
Abscisic acid
The batches of seeds were left to
germinate at 25°C in identical conditions
and the percentage germination was
calculated. The graph shows the results of
this investigation.
3
XA water
germination (%)
abscisic acid
*--------------------------XB
0 0.05 0.
5 5
concentration of gibberellin (moldm-3)
(log scale)
458
16
PLANT RESPONSES
chances of roots forming, and of successful propagation taking place.
This has made it much easier for horticulturists to develop cuttings to
sell and for individuals taking their own cuttings.
In both horticulture and agriculture, many plants are now propagated
on a large scale by micropropagation, when thousands of new plants
are grown from a few cells of the original plant. Plant hormones are
essential in this process - they control the production of the mass of
new cells and then the differentiation of the clones into tiny new plants.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
the use of plant hormones in
taking cuttings in Topic 22.1,
Natural cloning in plants and
the use of plant hormones in
micropropagation in Topic 22.2,
Artificial cloning in plants.
Hormonal weedkillers
As you have seen, the interactions between the different plant
hormones are finely balanced to enable the plant to grow. If this
balance is lost it can interrupt the metabolism of the whole plant and
may lead to plant death. Sometimes, this is exactly what we want to
achieve, and plant hormones can help us. Weeds are plants that grow
where they are not wanted. Commercial food crops are vital globally
for producing the food people need to eat. Weeds interfere with crop
plants, competing for light, space, water, and minerals.
Figure 2 Using rooting powder on
cuttings is very simple and effective
Scientists have developed synthetic auxins which act as very effective
weedkillers. Many of the main staple foods around the world are
narrow-leaved monocot plants such as rice, maize, and wheat. Most
of the weeds are broad-leaved dicots. If synthetic dicot auxins are
applied as weedkiller, they are absorbed by the broad-leaved plants
and affect their metabolism. The growth rate increases and becomes
unsustainable, so they die. The narrow-leaved crop plants are not
affected and continue to grow normally, freed from competition. The
synthetic auxins used by farmers and gardeners are simple and cheap
to produce, have a very low toxicity to mammals, and are selective.
Summary questions
1 How are plant hormones
used to control the ripening
of fruit?
(4 marks)
Other uses of plant hormones
There are many different ways in which plant hormones are used
commercially as well as those explored here. Examples include:
2 Why is it commercially
important to be able to
control fruit ripening? (6 marks)
Auxins can be used in the production of seedless fruit.
3 Produce a table to summarise
as many commercial uses
as you can find for four named
plant hormones. (6 marks)
Ethene is used to promote fruit dropping in plants such as cotton,
walnuts, and cherries.
Cytokinins are used to prevent ageing of ripened fruit and
products such as lettuces, and in micropropagation to control
tissue development.
Gibberellins can be used to delay ripening and ageing in fruit, to
improve the size and shape of fruits, and in beer brewing to speed
up the malting process.
4 Look at the graph in Figure 1.
a Describe the changes in
ethene production and
carbon dioxide production
in the tomato as it ripens.
(6 marks)
b Suggest what is happening.
(6 marks)
c Why do cool conditions slow
the rate of ripening even
if ethene is present?
(3 marks)
457
PLANT RESPONSES
16
Abscission
Germination Growth to Flowering
maturity
Fruit
development
Seed
dormancy
Gibberellin
Auxin
Cytokinins
Ethylene
ABA
The results are shown in the graph.
leaf number
PAN
leaf surface area
leaf number
number of leaves
control
stressed
TTTT
total leaf area (cm2/plant)
leaf surface area
+0
0
1
2
3
4
5
9
10 11 12 13 14
6 7 8
time (days)
a
a In the past plant chemicals such as auxins
and gibberellins were referred to as plant
hormones. At one stage this was changed
to plant growth regulators. Now they are
again generally referred to in university
plant biology departments as plant
hormones.
Explain why plant hormone is a more
accurate term than plant growth
regulator.
(5 marks)
b Copy and complete the table and indicate
which hormone(s) is/are involved at each
stage, using crosses. Gibberellins have
already been completed as an example.
(4 marks)
c Compare and contrast the activity of
auxins and cytokinins.
(6 marks)
In an investigation into the effects of water
stress, cowpea seeds were sown and the
seedlings were thinned to one per pot. The
plants were watered normally until mature
then watering was completely stopped for
14 days to induce water stress.
The number of leaves and total leaf surface
area were measured daily throughout this
period.
4
b
(i) Describe the changes in leaf number
and surface area over the 14 day
period shown in the graph. (3 marks)
(ii) Describe and explain the effects
of water stress on the growth and
development of plants. (3 marks)
Outline the process of leaf abscission
including the roles of plant hormones.
(5 marks)
Compare and contrast the response of
cowpeas to water stress to the loss of
leaves by trees in the UK in autumn.
(5 marks)
459
16
PLANT RESPONSES
Summary questions
1 Why is it so important for
plants to be able to respond to
their surroundings? (2 marks)
The opening and closing of the stomata in response to abiotic stresses
is largely under the control of the hormone ABA. The leaf cells
appear to release ABA under abiotic stress, causing stomatal closure.
However, scientists now think that the roots also provide an early
warning of water stresses through ABA. So, for example, when
the levels of soil water fall and transpiration is under threat, plant
roots produce ABA which is transported to the leaves where it binds
to receptors on the plasma membrane of the stomatal guard cells.
ABA activates changes in the ionic concentration of the guard cells,
reducing the water potential and therefore turgor of the cells. As a
result of reduced turgor, the guard cells close the stomata and water
loss by transpiration is greatly reduced.
2 Why do many trees in
temperate climates lose all of
their leaves in winter?
(6 marks)
3 Produce a flow diagram
to explain the process of
abscission.
(6 m
leaf water potential/Mpa
stomatal resistance scm-1
ABA concentration/ngcm-2
4 a Explain how plant
hormones are involved in
protecting the plant cells
from damage in freezing
conditions. (5 marks)
b Give two more adaptations
by which plant cells may be
protected against damage
by freezing during the
winter. (3 marks)
c If there is a sudden spell of
freezing weather early in
the autumn, many plants
which can normally survive
the winter may be killed.
Similarly, if there is a late
frost after several weeks of
warm spring weather, plants
that have already survived
a harsh winter can die.
Explain the difference in
the response of the plants
in these circumstances
compared with the winter
months. (6 marks)
rewatering
i 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
time (days)
Figure 3 Changes in water potential, stomatal resistance, and ABA content in
corn in response to water stress - stomatal resistance increases as stomata close.
All measurements of stomatal resistance in excess of 20 s cm- are shown
as 50 scm-1
5 Explain how the experimental
evidence shown in Figure 3
supports the idea of ABA from
the roots affecting stomatal
opening in times of water
stress.
(6 marks)
447
16.3 Plant responses to herbivory
Specification reference: 5.1.5
Herbivores are animals that eat plants. They range from tiny insects
to enormous animals such as elephants and rhinos. Herbivory is the
process by which herbivores eat plants.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the types of plant responses.
Responses to herbivory
Plants cannot escape animals which want to eat them, so they have
evolved a wide range of defences to prevent attack by herbivores or
minimise the damage they do.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the responses
of plants to attack by pathogens
and the defensive chemicals they
make in Topic 12.4, Plant defences
against pathogens.
Physical defences
Common physical defences include thorns, barbs, spikes, spiny leaves,
fibrous and inedible tissue, hairy leaves, and even stings to protect
themselves and discourage herbivores from eating them.
Chemical defences
Plants have also evolved a wide range of chemical responses to herbivory
- the stinging nettle manages to include both physical and chemical
defences in its vicious trichomes (stinging hairs), but many other plants
produce a cocktail of unpleasant chemicals too. These include:
Tannins - part of a group of compounds called phenols produced
by many plants. Tannins can make up to 50% of the dry weight
of the leaves. They have a very bitter taste which puts animals
off eating the leaves. They are toxic to insects - they bind to the
digestive enzymes produced in the saliva and inactivate them. Tea
and red wine are both rich in plant tannins.
Figure 1 These thorns act to deter
herbivores. The fruit, which have evolved
to be eaten to spread the seeds, are held
on thorn-free stalks
Alkaloids - a large group of very bitter tasting, nitrogenous
compounds found in many plants. Many of them act as drugs,
affecting the metabolism of animals that take them in and
sometimes poisoning them. Alkaloids include caffeine, nicotine,
morphine, and cocaine. Caffeine is toxic to fungi and insects, and
the caffeine produced by coffee bush seedlings spreads through the
soil and prevents the germination of the seeds of other plants – so
caffeine protects the plant both against herbivores and against plant
rivals. Nicotine is a toxin produced in the roots of tobacco plants,
transported to the leaves and stored in vacuoles to be released when
the leaf is eaten.
Terpenoids - a large group of compounds produced by plants
which often form essential oils but also often act as toxins to
insects and fungi that might attack the plant. Pyrethrin, produced
by chrysanthemums, acts as an insect neurotoxin, interfering with
the nervous system. Some terpenoids act as insect repellents, for
example, citronella produced by lemon grass repels insects.
Figure 2 A stinging nettle magnified
20x, these hollow stinging hairs act
like hypodermic needles and inject
histamines and other irritant chemicals
into animals that try to eat the leaves
448
