13
13.5 Synapses
Study tip
There are many different
neurotransmitters such as
dopamine, serotonin, and
adrenaline. The one you have to
concentrate on is acetylcholine
and its role in a cholinergic
synapse.
Transmission of impulses across synapses
Synaptic transmission occurs as a result of the following:
. The action potential reaches the end of the presynaptic neurone
Depolarisation of the presynaptic membrane causes calcium ion
channels to open
Calcium ions diffuse into the presynaptic knob
This causes synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitters to fuse
with the presynaptic membrane. Neurotransmitter is released into
the synaptic cleft by exocytosis
Neurotransmitter diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds with
its specific receptor molecule on the postsynaptic membrane
This causes sodium ion channels to open
Sodium ions diffuse into the postsynaptic neurone
This triggers an action potential and the impulse is propagated
along the postsynaptic neurone.
Once a neurotransmitter has triggered an action potential in the
postsynaptic neurone, it is important that it is removed so the
stimulus is not maintained, and so another stimulus can arrive at
and affect the synapse. Any neurotransmitter left in the synaptic
cleft is removed. Acetycholine is broken down by enzymes,
which also releases them from the receptors on the postsynaptic
membrane. The products are taken back into the presynaptic knob.
Removing the neurotransmitter from the synaptic cleft prevents the
response from happening again and allows the neurotransmitter to
be recycled.
Transmission across cholinergic synapses
Cholinergic synapses use the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. They
are common in the CNS of vertebrates and at neuromuscular
junctions - where a motor neurone and a muscle cell (an effector)
meet. If the neurotransmitter reaches the receptors on a muscle
cell, it will cause the muscle to contract. Acetylcholine is released
from the vesicles in the presynaptic knob (Figure 2). It then diffuses
across the synaptic cleft where it binds with specific receptors in
the postsynaptic membrane. This triggers an action potential in the
postsynaptic neurone or muscle cell. Once an action potential has
been triggered, acetylcholine is hydrolysed by a specific enzyme -
acetylcholinesterase. This enzyme is also situated on the postsynaptic
membrane. Acetylcholine is hydrolysed to give choline and ethanoic
acid. One molecule of acetylcholinesterase can break down around
25000 molecules of acetylcholine per minute. The breakdown
products are taken back into the presynaptic knob to be reformed
into acetylcholine, and the postsynaptic membrane is ready to receive
another impulse.
356
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
13.1 Coordination
Specification reference: 5.1.1
When changes occur in an organism's internal or external
environment, the organism must respond to these changes in order to
survive. Examples of these changes are shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the need for communication
systems in multicellular
organisms
the communication between
cells by cell signalling.
Internal environment
External environment
blood glucose concentration
internal temperature
water potential
cell pH
humidity
external temperature
light intensity
new or sudden sound
Animals and plants respond to these changes in a variety of ways.
Animals react through electrical responses (via neurones), and
through chemical responses (via hormones). Plant responses are based
on a number of chemical communication systems including plant
hormones. These communication systems must be coordinated to
produce the required response in an organism.
A Figure 1 Complex coordination
systems are needed to enable your body
to cope with the sort of changes you
encounter when moving from a warm, lit
house to a dark, frosty outside world
Synoptic link
You will find out about the nervous
system throughout Chapter 13,
Neuronal communication, the
hormonal system in Chapter 14,
Hormonal communication, and
coordination in plants in Chapter 16,
Plant responses
Why coordination is needed
As species have evolved, cells within organisms have become
specialised to perform specific functions. As a result organisms need
to coordinate the function of different cells and systems to operate
effectively. Few body systems can work in isolation (apart from a few
exceptions, for example, a heart can continue to beat if placed in the
right bathing solution). For example, red blood cells transport oxygen
effectively, but have no nucleus. This means that these cells are not
able to replicate - a constant supply of red blood cells to the body is
maintained by haematopoietic stem cells. In order to contract, muscle
cells must constantly respire, and thus require a consistent oxygen
supply. As these cells cannot transport oxygen, they are dependent
on red blood cells for this function. In plants flowering needs to
coordinate with the seasons, and pollinators must coordinate with the
plants. In temperate climates light-sensitive chemicals enable plants to
coordinate the development of flower buds with the lengthening days
that signal the approach of spring and summer.
Figure 2 Everything from the fresh spring
leaves to the reproductive behaviour of these
birds and of the insects with which they feed
their young is controlled by chemicals and/or
nervous coordination
342
13
13.9 Voluntary and involuntary muscles
Figure 1 Skeletal muscle, x2
magnification
A Figure 2 Cardiac muscle, approx 300
magnification
Figure 3 Involuntary muscle,
approx x157 magnification
Structure of skeletal muscle
Muscle fibres
Skeletal muscles are made up of bundles of muscle fibres. These are
enclosed within a plasma membrane known as the sarcolemma.
sarcolemma
-nucleus
The muscle fibres contain a number of nuclei
and are much longer than normal cells,
as they are formed as a result of many
individual embryonic muscle cells fusing
together. This makes the muscle stronger, as
the junction between adjacent cells would act
as a point of weakness. The shared cytoplasm
within a muscle fibre is known as sarcoplasm.
- myofibril
sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Parts of the sarcolemma fold inwards
(known as transverse or T tubules) to help
spread electrical impulses throughout the
sarcoplasm. This ensures that the whole of
the fibre receives the impulse to contract at
the same time.
A Figure 4 Structure of a muscle fibre, approx x10 000 magnification Muscle fibres have lots of mitochondria to
provide the ATP that is needed for muscle
Study tip
contraction. They also have a modified version of the endoplasmic
reticulum, known as the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This extends
When thinking about the structure
throughout the muscle fibre and contains calcium ions required for
of muscles think of a rope. A
muscle contraction.
rope is made up of lots of strings
(muscle fibres), which themselves Myofibrils
are made up of lots of threads
Each muscle fibre contains many myofibrils. These are long
(myofibrils), acting together to
cylindrical organelles made of protein and specialised for contraction.
give it its strength.
On their own they provide almost no force but collectively they are
very powerful. Myofibrils are lined up in parallel to provide maximum
force when they all contract together. Myofibrils are made up of two
types of protein filament:
Actin - the thinner filament. It consists of two strands twisted
around each other.
Myosin – the thicker filament. It consists of long rod-shaped fibres
with bulbous heads that project to one side.
370
13.9 Voluntary and involuntary
muscles
Specification reference: 5.1.5
There are around 650 muscles in the body, making up roughly half
of the body's weight. The contraction of many muscle cells causes the
body to move (Topic 13.10, Sliding filament theory). However, there
are many muscle cells in the body whose contractions you are largely
unaware of.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the structure of mammalian
muscle and the mechanism
of muscular contraction
the examination of stained
sections or photomicrographs
of skeletal muscle.
Types of muscle
There are three types of muscle in the body:
Skeletal muscle - skeletal muscles make up the bulk of body
muscle tissue. These are the cells responsible for movement, for
example, the biceps and triceps.
Cardiac muscle - cardiac muscle cells are found only in the heart.
These cells are myogenic, meaning they contract without the need
for a nervous stimulus, causing the heart to beat in a regular rhythm.
Involuntary muscle (also known as smooth muscle) - involuntary
muscle cells are found in many parts of the body - for example, in
the walls of hollow organs such as the stomach and bladder. They
are also found in the walls of the blood vessels and the digestive
tract, where through peristalsis they move food along the gut.
Table 1 Important differences in the structure and function of the different types of muscle
Type of muscle
Skeletal
Cardiac
Involuntary
Fibre appearance striated
specialised striated
non-striated
Control
conscious (voluntary) involuntary
involuntary
regularly arranged so muscle cells branch and interconnect no regular arrangement - different
Arrangement
contracts in one direction resulting in simultaneous contraction cells can contract in different directions
Contraction speed rapid
intermediate
slow
Length of
can remain contracted for a
short
intermediate
contraction
relatively long time
Structure
Muscles showing cross
striations are known as striated
or striped muscles. Fibres are
tubular and multinucleated.
Cardiac muscle does show striations
but they are much fainter than
those in skeletal muscle. Fibres are
branched and uninucleated.
Muscles showing no cross striations
are called non-striated or unstriped
muscles. Fibres are spindle shaped
land uninucleated.
369
13.5 Synapses
Specification reference: 5.1.3
In Topic 13.4, Nervous transmission, you learnt about how impulses
travel along each neurone in the form of an action potential. However,
to reach the CNS or an effector, the impulse often needs to be passed
between several neurones. The junction between two neurones (or a
neurone and effector) is called a synapse. Impulses are transmitted
across the synapse using chemicals called neurotransmitters.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the structure and
roles of synapses in
neurotransmission.
Synapse structure
All synapses have a number of key features:
Lo Ca2+
Synaptic cleft – the gap which separates
– myelin sheath
the axon of one neurone from the dendrite
axon of presynaptic
of the next neurone. It is approximately
neurone
20-30 nm across.
Presynaptic neurone - neurone along which
membrane of
presynaptic neurone
the impulse has arrived.
mitochondrion
smooth endoplasmic
Postsynaptic neurone - neurone that
reticulum
receives the neurotransmitter
synaptic
vesicle
Synaptic knob - the swollen end of the
containing
presynaptic neurone. It contains many acetylcholine
calcium ion
mitochondria and large amounts of
Ca2+
channel
endoplasmic reticulum to enable it to
manufacture neurotransmitters (in
most cases).
Synaptic vesicles - vesicles containing
neurotransmitters. The vesicles fuse with
membrane
the presynaptic membrane and release their
of postsynaptic
contents into the synaptic cleft.
acetylcholine
neurone
molecule
sodium ion channels
Neurotransmitter receptors - receptor
synaptic cleft
molecules which the neurotransmitter binds
to in the postsynaptic membrane.
acetylcholine
empty receptor site
molecule in
Types of neurotransmitter
receptor site
one of five protein sub-units
that make up the sodium ion
Neurotransmitters can be grouped into
channel
two categories:
1 Excitatory - these neurotransmitters result
in the depolarisation of the postsynaptic
A Figure 1 Structure of a synapse. This synapse is known as a cholinergic
neurone. If the threshold is reached in the synapse as the neurotransmitter which passes across the synapse
postsynaptic membrane an action potential
is acetylcholine
is triggered. Acetylcholine is an example of
an excitatory neurotransmitter.
2 Inhibitory – these neurotransmitters result in the hyperpolarisation
of the postsynaptic membrane. This prevents an action potential
being triggered. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is an example
of an inhibitory neurotransmitter that is found in some synapses
in the brain.
355
Nata
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
13
Synoptic link
You will find out about homeostasis
in Chapter 15, Homeostasis.
Homeostasis
In many relatively large multicellular animals, different organs have
different functions in the body. Therefore, the functions of organs
must be coordinated in order to maintain a relatively constant internal
environment. This is known as homeostasis. For example, the
digestive organs such as the exocrine pancreas, duodenum,
and ileum along with the endocrine pancreas and the
liver work together to maintain a constant blood glucose
concentration.
brain
diet
glucose +
liver
intestine
Cell signalling
Nervous and hormonal systems coordinate the activities
of whole organisms. This coordination relies on
communication at a cellular level through cell signalling.
This occurs through one cell releasing a chemical which
has an effect on another cell, known as a target cell.
Through this process, cells can:
blood
fat
muscle
insulin
pancreas
transfer signals locally, for example, between neurones
at synapses. Here the signal used is a neurotransmitter.
transfer signals across large distances, using hormones.
For example, the cells of the pituitary gland secrete
antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which acts on cells in the
kidneys to maintain water balance in the body.
A Figure 3 To maintain blood glucose concentration,
the function of many organs must be coordinated
Synoptic link
You will find out more about
cell signalling in Topic 14.5,
Coordinated responses.
Coordination in plants
Plants do not have a nervous system like animals. However, to survive
they still must respond to internal and external changes to their
environment. For example, plant stems grow towards a light source
to maximise their rate of photosynthesis. This is achieved through the
use of plant hormones.
Summary questions
(2 marks)
1 State one internal factor which causes a response in:
a a plant
b an animal
2 Describe how cells are able to communicate with one another. (2 marks)
Figure 4 When aphids attack certain
types of wheat, the wheat plant cells
produce chemicals both to alert other cells
within the plant to the attack, and to signal
to other aphids, putting them off landing
on the plant and attacking it further
3 Using examples, explain why coordination is required in a
multicellular organism.
(6 marks)
Synoptic link
You will find out more about plant
hormones in Chapter 16, Plant
responses.
343
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
13
4
1 The arrival of an action potential at the end of the presynaptic
neurone causes calcium ion channels to open and calcium
ions (Ca2+) enter the synaptic knob.
The influx of sodium ions generates a new action
potential in the postsynaptic neurone.
presynaptic
neurone
action
potential
Ca2+
Ca2+
synaptic vesicle
containing
acetylcholine
calcuim ion
channel
open
New
action
potential
postsynaptic
neurone
sodium ion
channel
closed
2 The influx of calcium ions into the presynaptic neurone causes
synaptic vesicles to fuse with the presynaptic membrane, so
releasing acetylcholine into the synaptic cleft.
Acetylcholinesterase hydrolyses acetylcholine into
choline and ethanoic acid (acetyl), which diffuse back
across the synaptic cleft into the presynaptic neurone
(= recycling). In addition to recycling the choline and
ethanoic acid, the breakdown of acetylcholine also
prevents it from continuously generating a new action
potential in the postsynaptic neurone.
vesicle fuses
with membrane
acetylcholine
released into
the synaptic
cleft
acetylcholinesterase
empty
receptor
site
sodium ion
channel
closed
sodium ion
channel closed
6
3 Acetylcholine molecules fuse with receptor sites on the sodium
ion channel in the membrane of the postsynaptic neurone.
This causes the sodium ion channels to open, allowing sodium
ions (Na+) to diffuse in rapidly along a concentration gradient.
ATP released by mitochondria is used to recombine
choline and ethanoic acid into acetycholine. This is stored
in synaptic vesicles for future use. Sodium ion channels
close in the absence of acetylcholine in the receptor sites.
mitochondrion
produces ATP
two acetylcholine
molecules fused
to receptor sites
ATP used in reactions
recombining choline
and ethanoic acid
2015
Na+ Nar
sodium ion
- Sodium ion
channel
channel
open
sodium ion channel closed
open
Sodium ions (Na+)
A Figure 2 Mechanism of transmission across a cholinergic synapse - only essential structures are shown
opene
acetylcholine
returns to
synaptic vesicle
sodium ion channel closed
357
13
13.5 Synapses
spatial summation
presynaptic
neurone A
no action potential
Role of synapses
In simple models a neurone with a single synapse is shown.
In the body, however, one neurone may make thousands of
synapses using the dendron, dendrites, and axons. Synapses
play an important role in the nervous system:
•
presynaptic
neurone B
no action potential
They ensure impulses are unidirectional. As the
neurotransmitter receptors are only present on the
postsynaptic membrane, impulses can only travel from the
presynaptic neurone to the postsynaptic neurone.
They can allow an impulse from one neurone to be
transmitted to a number of neurones at multiple synapses.
This results in a single stimulus creating a number of
simultaneous responses.
Alternatively, a number of neurones may feed in to the
same synapse with a single postsynaptic neurone. This
results in stimuli from different receptors interacting to
produce a single result.
action potential
A Figure 3 On their own, neurone A and neurone B
do not produce enough neurotransmitter to trigger
an action potential. However, together there is
enough neurotransmitter to reach the threshold
and trigger an action potential in the postsynaptic
neurone
Summation and control
Each stimulus from a presynaptic neurone causes the release
of the same amount of neurotransmitter into the synapse.
In some synapses, however, the amount of neurotransmitter
from a single impulse is not enough to trigger an action
potential in the postsynaptic neurone, as the threshold level
is not reached. However, if the amount of neurotransmitter
builds up sufficiently to reach the threshold then this will
trigger an action potential. This is known as summation.
There are two ways this can occur:
temporal summation
low-frequency action potentials
•
no action
potential
Spatial summation - this occurs when a number of
presynaptic neurones connect to one postsynaptic
neurone. Each releases neurotransmitter which builds up
to a high enough level in the synapse to trigger an action
potential in the single postsynaptic neurone (Figure 3).
Temporal summation - this occurs when a single presynaptic
neurone releases neurotransmitter as a result of an action
potential several times over a short period. This builds up
in the synapse until the quantity is sufficient to trigger an
action potential (Figure 4).
high-frequency action potentials
action
potential
presynaptic neurone
postsynaptic neurone
Figure 4 If neurotransmitter is released several
times in quick succession from a presynaptic neurone,
the level builds up in the synapse and triggers an action
potential in the postsynaptic neurone
neurotransmitter
358
13.2 Neurones
Specification reference: 5.1.3
The nervous system is responsible for detecting changes in the internal
and external environment. These changes are known as a stimulus.
This information then needs to be processed and an appropriate
response triggered.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the structure and functions
of sensory, relay, and motor
neurones.
Both the nervous system and hormonal system play a role in reacting
to stimuli, but they do so in very different ways. In this chapter you
will focus on neuronal communication. This is generally a much
faster and more targeted response than that produced by hormonal
communication.
Synoptic link
You will find out about hormonal
communication in Chapter 14,
Hormonal communication.
Neurones
You have already learnt that the nervous system is made up billions
of specialised nerve cells called neurones. The role of neurones
is to transmit electrical impulses rapidly around the body so that
the organism can respond to changes in its internal and external
environment. There are several different types of neurone found
within a mammal. They work together to carry information detected
by a sensory receptor to the effector, which in turn carries out the
appropriate response.
Structure of a neurone
Mammalian neurones have several key features:
Figure 1 Nerve fibres (axons). They
are grouped together into bundles
called nerves, which transmit electrical
impulses to and from the central nervous
system approx x800 magnification
Cell body – this contains the nucleus surrounded by cytoplasm.
Within the cytoplasm there are also large amounts of endoplasmic
reticulum and mitochondria which are involved in the production
of neurotransmitters. These are chemicals which are used to
pass signals from one neurone to the next. You will find out more
about the important role of neurotransmitters in the nervous
system in Topic 13.5, Synapses.
Dendrons - these are short extensions which come from the cell
body. These extensions divide into smaller and smaller branches
known as dendrites. They are responsible for transmitting electrical
impulses towards the cell body.
Axons - these are singular, elongated nerve fibres that transmit
impulses away from the cell body. These fibres can be very long,
for example, those that transmit impulses from the tips of toes
and fingers to the spinal cord. The fibre is cylindrical in shape
consisting of a very narrow region of cytoplasm (in most cases
approximately lum) surrounded by a plasma membrane.
344
13
13.3 Sensory receptors
neurone
ending
layers of
connective
tissue with
viscous gel
between
Figure 2 shows the structure of a Pacinian corpuscle. The end of
the sensory neurone is found within the centre of the corpuscle,
surrounded by layers of connective tissue. Each layer of tissue is
separated by a layer of gel.
capsule
Within the membrane of the neurone there are sodium ion channels.
These are responsible for transporting sodium ions across the
membrane. The neurone ending in a Pacinian corpuscle has a special
type of sodium channel called a stretch-mediated sodium channel.
When these channels change shape, for example, when they stretch,
their permeability to sodium also changes.
blood
capillary
neurone
A Figure 2 The structure of a Pacinian
corpuscle
You learnt about the structure of different neurones in Topic 13.2,
Neurones and you will learn more about the transmission of nerve
impulses in Topic 13.4, Nervous transmission.
stretching opens sodium
channels and creates a
generator potential.
this leads to an action
potential in the neurone
neurone
membrane
The following steps explain how a Pacinian corpuscle converts
mechanical pressure into a nervous impulse:
1 In its normal state (known as its resting state), the stretch-mediated
sodium ion channels in the sensory neurone's membrane are too
narrow to allow sodium ions to pass through them. The neurone of
the Pacinian corpuscle has a resting potential.
+
+
2
+
When pressure is applied to the Pacinian corpuscle, the corpuscle
changes shape. This causes the membrane surrounding its neurone
to stretch
pressure
acts as the
stimulus
+
+
3 When the membrane stretches, the sodium ion channels present
widen. Sodium ions can now diffuse into the neurone.
+
+
4
The influx of positive sodium ions changes the potential of the
membrane - it becomes depolarised. This results in a generator
potential.
5
In turn, the generator potential creates an action potential (a nerve
impulse) that passes along the sensory neurone.
The action potential will then be transmitted along neurones to
the CNS.
A Figure 3 A generator potential is
created when mechanical pressure causes
a Pacinian corpuscle to change shape
Summary questions
1 Describe the role of a sensory receptor in the body.
(2 marks)
(1 mark)
2 State the transformation that takes place in a cone cell.
3 Explain how your body detects that your finger has
touched a pin.
(6 marks)
348
13
13.4 Nervous transmission
The size of the stimulus, however, does affect the number of action
potentials that are generated in a given time. The larger the stimulus
the more frequently the action potentials are generated.
The effect of the size of the stimulus on the frequency of nerve
impulses can be seen in Figure 6.
Measuring action potentials o
The presence and frequency of action potentials can be recorded using an
oscilloscope. The diagram below shows some sample data collected in this
manner, showing two action potentials:
+60
membrane potential/mV
i
į
§
4
5
6
§
§
§
10
time/ms
A Figure 7
1 State what occurs in the neurone between 1 ms and 2 ms.
2 State and explain how the membrane potential changes between
5.5 ms and 7 ms.
3 Using the data shown in the graph, calculate the frequency of action
potentials.
Summary questions
1 State how the body detects the difference between a
small and a large stimulus.
2 State the difference between depolarisation,
repolarisation, and hyperpolarisation. (2 marks)
4 Describe how the movement of ions establishes the
resting potential in an axon.
(4 marks)
5 Explain how temperature receptors in the hand
generate an action potential in the sensory
neurone to tell the body that you are touching
a hot object
(6 marks)
3 Describe what would happen if a refractory period did
not exist.
(2 marks)
354
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Apart from myelination, two other factors affect the speed at which an
action potential travels:
Axon diameter - the bigger the axon diameter, the faster the impulse
is transmitted. This is because there is less resistance to the flow of
ions in the cytoplasm, compared with those in a smaller axon.
Temperature - the higher the temperature, the faster the nerve
impulse. This is because ions diffuse faster at higher temperatures.
However, this generally only occurs up to about 40°C as higher
temperatures cause the proteins (such as the sodium-potassium
pump) to become denatured.
All-or-nothing principle
Nerve impulses are said to be all-or-nothing responses. A certain level of
stimulus, the threshold value, always triggers a response. If this threshold is
reached an action potential will always be created. No matter how large
the stimulus is, the same sized action potential will always be triggered. If
the threshold is not reached, no action potential will be triggered.
1 very weak stimulus
Threshold not exceeded No depolarisation No action potential
2 weak stimulus
Threshold exceeded
Depolarisation
Action potential
potential difference/mV
resting potential
3 strong stimulus
Threshold exceeded
Depolarisation
Action potentials the
same size but more
frequent
potential difference/mv
4 very strong stimulus
Threshold exceeded
Depolarisation
Action potentials the
same size but even
more frequent
potential difference/mV
A Figure 6 Effect of stimulus intensity on impulse frequency
353
13.3 Sensory receptors
Specification reference: 5.1.3
The body is able to detect changes in its environment using groups of
specialised cells known as sensory receptors. These are often located in
the sense organs, such as the ear and eye.
Sensory receptors convert the stimulus they detect into a nerve
impulse. The information is then passed through the nervous system
and on into the central nervous system (CNS) - normally to the
brain. The brain coordinates the required response and sends an
impulse to an effector (normally a muscle or gland) to result in the
desired response.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the roles of mammalian
sensory receptors in
converting different types of
stimuli into nerve impulses.
............................
Features of sensory receptors
All sensory receptors have two main features:
They are specific to a single type of stimulus.
They act as a transducer - they convert a stimulus into a
nerve impulse.
There are four main types of sensory receptor present in an animal,
shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Type of sensory
receptor
Stimulus
Example of receptor
Example of
sense organ
mechanoreceptor
skin
pressure and
movement
Pacinian corpuscle
(detects pressure)
Synoptic link
Plants also respond to stimuli,
but their receptor cells produce
chemicals rather than nerve
impulses. You will find out more
about plant responses in
Chapter 16, Plant responses.
chemoreceptor
chemicals
nose
olfactory receptor
(detects smells)
end-bulbs of Krause
thermoreceptor
heat
tongue
photoreceptors
light
cone cell
(detects different
light wavelengths)
eye
Role as a transducer
Sensory receptors detect a range of different stimuli including light,
heat, sound, or pressure. The receptor converts the stimulus into
a nervous impulse, called a generator potential. For example, a rod
cell (found in your eye) responds to light and produces a generator
potential.
Pacinian corpuscle
Pacinian corpuscles are specific sensory receptors that detect mechanical
pressure. They are located deep within your skin and are most abundant
in the fingers and the soles of the feet. They are also found within joints,
enabling you to know which joints are changing direction.
Figure 1 A Pacinian corpuscle. These
sensory receptors are found mostly in
the skin of the feet, hands, genitals, and
nipples. They respond to vibration and
deep pressure
347
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
To gain the signal trace, electromyography uses
electrodes which detect the electrical currents created
when muscles contract. Changes in this signal are used
to identify fatigue, which may include:
an increase in the mean amplitude of the signal
a decrease in the frequency of the signal
disruption to the overall pattern existing within
the signal.
force N
Figure 8 At 2.5s the subject
grasped a grip strength meter
as hard as possible. Notice how
the strength of the subject's
grip peaked at 5.5s and
then gradually declined until
recording ended at 20s
5
15
10
time/s
20
sensor p.d./mV
WONNEFOOOFENNW
Gououououououou
Till 1 1 1
Figure 9 EMG sensor trace
from a muscle undergoing
fatigue. Notice that the
electrical activity in the muscle
increases over time while,
as shown in Figure 8, the
maximum force produced by a
muscle decreases
1
5
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
time/s
1 Plan an investigation into muscle fatigue, using an EMG to monitor the
activity of the muscle.
2 A 00 Suggest how the outcomes from the investigation could be
used to identify when the muscle became fatigued.
Summary questions
1
A State two differences in the appearance of a sarcomere in a relaxed
and contracted muscle when observed through a microscope. (2 marks)
2 Professional sprinters have high levels of creatine phosphate
in their muscle cells. Describe why this is advantageous.
(2 marks)
3 After a person's death, their body can no longer produce ATP. This results
in the stiffening of muscles (rigor mortis). Explain why a lack
of ATP prevents muscles relaxing.
(3 marks)
4 Bepridil is a drug that can be used to treat angina, a form of heart
disease. It works by partially blocking calcium ion channels. Explain
the effect bepridil will have on heart muscle contraction. (4 marks)
379
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Na+ channel
Propagation of action potentials
A nerve impulse is an action potential that starts at one end of the neurone
and is propagated along the axon to the other end of the neurone.
K channel that can
be opened and
closed K+ channel that is
permanently open
The initial stimulus causes a change in the sensory receptor which
triggers an action potential in the sensory receptor, so the first
region of the axon membrane is depolarised. This acts as a stimulus
for the depolarisation of the next region of the membrane. The
process continues along the length of the axon forming a wave
of depolarisation. Once sodium ions are inside the axon, they are
attracted by the negative charge ahead and the concentration gradient
to diffuse further along inside the axon, triggering the depolarisation
of the next section.
outside axon
Nat
Nat
+
+
+
+
-
+
+
+
inside axon
ad
polarised
K+
outside axon
depolarised
repolarised
+
+
+
Na+
1 At resting potential the concentration of
sodium ions outside the axon membrane is
high relative to the inside, whereas that of the
potassium ions is high inside the membrane
relative to the outside. The overall concentra-
tion of positive ions is, however, greater on
the outside, making this positive compared
with the inside. The axon membrane is
polarised.
localised electrical
Nat Nat
Nat circuit
+
3
inside axon
+
,
+1
+1
+
-
+
-
+
stimulus
2 A stimulus causes a sudden influx of sodium
ions and hence a reversal of charge on the
axon membrane. This is the action potential
and the membrane is depolarised.
outside axon
1+
1+
+
+
+
+
1
inside axon
3 The localised electrical circuits established by
the influx of sodium ions cause the opening of
sodium voltage-gated channels a little further
along the axon. The resulting influx of sodium
ions in this region causes depolarisation.
Behind this new region of depolarisation, the
sodium voltage-gated channels close and the
potassium ones open. Potassium ions begin
to leave the axon along their electrochemical
gradient.
+
+
K+ outside axon
K+
Nat
1
inside axon
+
I
4 The action potential (depolarisation) is
propagated in the same way further along the
axon. The outward movement of the
potassium ions has continued to the extent
that the axon membrane behind the action
potential has returned to its original charged
state (positive outside, negative inside), that is,
it has been repolarised.
-
+
+
outside axon
Nat
Na+
5
+
+
-
+
i +
5 Following repolarisation the axon membrane
returns to its resting potential in readiness for
a new stimulus if it comes.
Nat
+
inside axon
.
+
Na+
A Figure 4 Changes in channel
proteins in axon membrane during an
action potential
Figure 3 Propagation of an action potential along a non-myelinated neurone
351
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Types of neurone
Neurones can be divided into three groups according to their function.
As a result they have slightly different structures:
Sensory neurones - these neurones transmit impulses from a sensory
receptor cell to a relay neurone, motor neurone, or the brain. They
have one dendron, which carries the impulse to the cell body, and
one axon, which carries the impulse away from the cell body.
Relay neurones – these neurones transmit impulses between
neurones. For example, between sensory neurones and motor
neurones. They have many short axons and dendrons.
Motor neurones - these neurones transmit impulses from a relay
neurone or sensory neurone to an effector, such as a muscle or a
gland. They have one long axon and many short dendrites.
In most nervous responses the electrical impulse follows the pathway:
Receptor → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector cell
sensory neurone
relay neurone
dendron nucleus
cell body
,72 cell body
-nucleus
axon
myelin
sheath
motor neurone
node of
Ranvier
dendrites
dendron
dendrites
nucleus
T1
cell body
cell body
direction of impulse
(from dendrites to axon)
axon
A Figure 2 Types of neurone
Myelinated neurones
The axons of some neurones are covered in a myelin sheath, made
of many layers of plasma membrane. Special cells, called Schwann
cells, produce these layers of membrane by growing around the
axon many times. Each time they grow around the axon, a double
layer of phospholipid bilayer is laid down. When the Schwann cell
stops growing there may be more than 20 layers of membrane. The
myelin sheath acts as an insulating layer and allows these myelinated
neurones to conduct the electrical impulse at a much faster speed
than unmyelinated neurones. Myelinated neurones can transmit
impulses at up to 100 metres per second. In comparison, non-
myelinated neurones can only conduct impulses at approximately
1 metre per second.
Figure 3 Transverse section through
an axon showing the myelin sheath
created by the Schwann cell's membrane
wrapping around the axon many times,
approx 25000 magnification
345
13
13.2 Neurones
@
axon terminal
axon terminal
nucleolus
dendrites
.
cell body
axon
.
Schwann cell
nucleus
$
ao Do
a
• O POVO
ao
OD
>>
myelin sheath
Summary questions
node of
Ranvier
Schwann
cell
CO
1 State the difference between
the function of a motor and a
sensory neurone. (1 mark)
106
axon
myelin sheath
2 Draw and annotate a diagram
of a motor neurone. (4 marks)
3 Describe the difference in
structure between a myelinated
and a non-myelinated neurone
and how this affects the speed
a nerve impulse is transmitted.
(4 marks)
Figure 4 Structure of a myelinated motor neurone
Between each adjacent Schwann cell there is a small gap (2–3 pm)
known as a node of Ranvier. This creates gaps in the myelin sheath. In
humans these occur every 1-3 mm. The myelin sheath is an electrical
insulator. In myelinated neurones, the electrical impulse 'jumps' from
one node to the next as it travels along the neurone. This allows the
impulse to be transmitted much faster. In non-myelinated neurones the
impulse does not jump-it transmits continuously along the nerve fibre,
so is much slower. You will find out more detail about the transmission
of impulses along axons in Topic 13.4, Nervous transmission.
Multiple sclerosis
MS is known to be an autoimmune disease. This is where
the immune system mistakenly attacks healthy body
tissue. This results in a thinning or complete loss of the
myelin sheath and, as the disease advances, results in the
breakdown of the axons of neurones. It is not known what
triggers this disorder but is thought to be a combination of
genetic and environmental factors, such as a viral infection.
Figure 5 Computer
artwork comparing a
healthy myelinated
nerve fibre (bottom) with
one from a person with
multiple sclerosis (top)
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurological condition which
affects around 100 000 people in the UK. Most people are
diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 40.
1 The population of the UK is around 65 000 000. Calculate
the proportion of the population who suffer from MS.
2 State what is meant by an autoimmune disease.
3 Describe the role of myelin in the body.
4 One of the symptoms of MS is the loss of vision,
normally in only one eye. Suggest why a damaged
myelin sheath could prevent a person from being
able to see.
MS affects nerves in the brain and spinal cord, causing a
wide range of symptoms, including problems with muscle
movement, balance, and vision.
346
13
13.4 Nervous transmission
Study tip
The region of the membrane which has been depolarised as the action
potential passed along now undergoes repolarisation to return to its
resting potential.
The action potential itself does
not move along the axon. Like
the Mexican wave, or a rumour,
the action potential is not a
physical entity, yet it moves. Each
individual stays still, but every
time a person raises their hand it
stimulates the person next to them
to do the same, producing a wave.
After an action potential there is a short period of time when the axon
cannot be excited again, this is known as the refractory period. During
this time, the voltage-gated sodium ion channels remain closed,
preventing the movement of sodium ions into the axon.
A refractory period is important because it prevents the propagation
of an action potential backwards along the axon as well as forwards.
The refractory period makes sure action potentials are unidirectional.
It also ensures that action potentials do not overlap and occur as
discrete impulses.
Saltatory conduction
Myelinated axons transfer electrical impulses much faster than
non-myelinated axons. This is because depolarisation of the axon
membrane can only occur at the nodes of Ranvier where no myelin is
present. Here the sodium ions can pass through the protein channels
in the membrane. Longer localised circuits therefore arise between
adjacent nodes. The action potential then jumps' from one node to
another in a process known as saltatory conduction. This is much
faster than a wave of depolarisation along the whole length of the
axon membrane. Every time channels open and ions move it takes
time, so reducing the number of places where this happens speeds up
the action potential transmission. Long-term, saltatory conduction
is also more energy efficient. Repolarisation uses ATP in the sodium
pump, so by reducing the amount of repolarisation needed, saltatory
conduction makes the conduction of impulses more efficient.
-action potential
resting potential
localised circuit
myelin sheath
(prevents action
potential)
-axon
node of Ranvier
node of Ranvier
direction of impulse
A Figure 5 Saltatory conduction along a myelinated axon
352
13
Chapter 13 Practice questions
normal neurone
Pasawa
damaged neurone
VVP
&
Practice questions
1 Tension in muscles is created as the myosin
filaments pull the actin filaments towards
each other as cross bridges form between the
filaments. The resting length of muscle fibres
determines, along with the frequency of
stimulation, the magnitude of this tension.
Elastic proteins, such as titins, present in
muscle resist the overstretching of muscle
fibres.
a (i) State the name of cross bridges that
form between the filaments. (1 mark)
(ii) State the term that describes the
fact that both the frequency of
stimulation and arrival of action
potentials determine the size of the
response.
(1 mark)
The diagram shows the changes in tension as
a muscles contracts.
bie
tension (percent of maximum)
normal
range
a (i) State the name of the specific part of
the nervous system damaged in people
with multiple sclerosis. (1 mark)
(ii) Describe and explain how this
damage would affect the functioning
of the nervous system. (4 marks)
Some of the symptoms of MS are described
here:
temporary loss of vision
loss of balance and co-ordination
incontinence / constipation
temporary loss of sensation in limbs
sensory impairment
b Explain why people with MS may get
these symptoms.
(4 marks)
An imbalance in the neurotransmitters in the
brain, particularly a shortage of serotonin,
is now considered to be one of the causes of
depression.
The diagram shows a synapse in the brain
which uses serotonin as a neurotransmitter.
GF
3
O lum 2um 3um 4um 5um
sarcomere length
b (i) Describe how muscle tension changes
with changing sarcomere length.
(4 marks)
(ii) State the optimal resting length of a
sarcomere.
(2 marks)
(iii) Explain, using the diagram, why
muscle fibres have a small range of
optimal resting lengths. (5 marks)
2 Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a condition that
affects the nervous system. The immune
system of people with MS treats parts of the
nervous system as foreign, and launches an
immune response damaging neurons. An
example of the damage caused is shown in
the diagram.
ww
w
380
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Structure of actin
Actin filaments have binding sites for myosin heads. These are called
actin-myosin binding sites. However, these binding sites are often
blocked by the presence of another protein called tropomyosin which
is held in place by the protein troponin.
When a muscle is in a resting state (relaxed) the actin-myosin sites are
blocked by tropomyosin. The myosin heads can therefore not bind to
the actin, and the filaments cannot slide past each other.
actin filaments spiralled
around one another
DJ
tropomyosin
molecule
When a muscle is stimulated to contract, the myosin heads form bonds
with actin filaments known as actin-myosin cross-bridges. The myosin
heads then flex (change angle) in unison, pulling the actin filament
along the myosin filament. The myosin then detaches from the actin
and its head returns to its original angle, using ATP. The myosin then
reattaches further along the actin filament and the process occurs
again. This is repeated up to 100 times per second.
Figure 4 Actin structure
Study tip
How muscle contraction occurs
Neuromuscular junction
Muscle contraction is triggered when an action potential arrives at a
neuromuscular junction - this is the point where a motor neurone
and a skeletal muscle fibre meet (Topics 13.4, Nervous transmission
and 13.5, Synapses). There are many neuromuscular junctions along
the length of a muscle to ensure that all the muscle fibres contract
simultaneously. If only one existed, the muscle fibres would not
contract together therefore the contraction of the muscle would not
be as powerful. It would also be much slower, as a wave of contraction
would have to travel across the muscle to stimulate the individual
fibres to contract.
Try to visualise the sliding filament
model as a rowing boat containing
several rowers. When the oars
(myosin heads) are dipped into the
river (bind to actin filament), the
cars change angle (myosin heads
flex), then are removed (myosin
heads detach). This is then repeated
further along the river. The rowers
work in unison, and so the boat and
water move relative to one another.
All the muscle fibres supplied by a single motor neurone are known as
a motor unit – the fibres act as a single unit. If a strong force is needed,
a large number of motor units are stimulated, whereas only a small
number are stimulated if a small force is required.
axon of motor neurone
neurone mitochondria
myelin sheath
sarcolemma
synaptic vesicle containing
acetylcholine
postsynaptic membrane
endoplasmic reticulum
sarcoplasm
When an action potential reaches
the neuromuscular junction, it
stimulates calcium ion channels
to open. Calcium ions then
diffuse from the synapse into
the synaptic knob, where they
cause synaptic vesicles to fuse
with the presynaptic membrane.
Acetylcholine is released into the
synaptic cleft by exocytosis and
diffuses across the synapse. It binds
to receptors on the postsynaptic
membrane (the sarcolemma),
opening sodium ion channels, and
resulting in depolarisation.
OO
non
mitochondrion H-zone
of muscle
Z-line
of muscle
light band dark band
of myofibril of myofibril
A Figure 5 Neuromuscular junction
375
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
mammalian nervous system
central nervous system (CNS)
brain and spinal cord
relay neurones
peripheral nervous system (PNS)
everything else
sensory and motor neurones
somatic nervous system
conscious control
input from sense organs
output to skeletal muscles
autonomic nervous system
subconscious control
input from internal receptors
output to smooth muscles and glands
sympathetic motor system
"fight or flight responses
neurotransmitter - noradrenaline
A Figure 1 Summary of the organisation of the mammalian nervous system
parasympathetic motor system
relaxing responses
neurotransmitter - acetylcholine
Table 2 Comparison of autonomic and somatic motor systems, where ACh = acetylcholine and NA = noradrenaline
Cell bodies in central
nervous system
Peripheral nervous system
Neurotransmitter
at effector
Effector
organs
Effect
single neuron from CNS to effector organs
ACH
somatic nervous system
stimulatory
heavily myelinated axon
skeletal muscle
neurons from CNS to effector organs
+
-
unmyelinated
postganglionic axon
sympathetic
lightly myelinated
preganglionic axons
ganglion
noradrenaline
autonomic
nervous
system
adrenal medulla
blood vessel
stimulatory
or inhibitory,
depending
on neuro-
transmitter
and
receptors
on effector
organs
ACH
parasym-
pathetic
smooth muscle
(eg., in gut), glands,
cardiac muscle
lightly myelinated
preganglionic axon
ganglion
unmyelinated
postganglionic
axon
Summary questions
1 State the difference between the peripheral and the
central nervous system.
(1 mark)
3 State and explain one reason why many autonomic
functions can be controlled.
(3 marks)
2 Sort the following activities into those which are
controlled by the somatic nervous system and those
which are controlled by the autonomic nervous system
a pupil dilation b blood pressure
c throwing a ball d blinking
e walking.
(2 marks)
361
13.4 Nervous transmission
Specification reference: 5.1.3
After the sensory receptor has detected a change in the environment,
an impulse is sent along the neurone by temporarily changing the
Learning outcomes
voltage (potential difference) across the axon's membrane. As a result,
Demonstrate knowledge,
the axon membrane switches between two states - a resting potential
understanding, and application of:
and an action potential. You will find out how the impulse travels
→ the generation and
between neurones in Topic 13.5, Synapses.
transmission of nerve
impulses in mammals.
Resting potential
When a neurone is not transmitting an impulse, the potential
difference across its membrane (difference in charge between the
Synoptic link
inside and outside of the axon) is known as a resting potential. In this
state, the outside of the membrane is more positively charged than the
Look back at Chapter 5, Plasma
inside of the axon. The membrane is said to be polarised as there is a
membranes to ensure you fully
potential difference across it. It is normally about -70 mV.
understand the structure of a
plasma membrane and the role of
The resting potential occurs as a result of the movement of sodium
intrinsic proteins.
and potassium ions across the axon membrane. The phospholipid
bilayer prevents these ions from diffusing across the membrane and,
therefore, they have to be transported via channel proteins. Some
of these channels are gated - they must be opened to allow specific
ions to pass through them. Other channels
tissue fluid outside axon
remain open all of the time allowing sodium and
sodium ions actively
potassium ions to simply diffuse through them.
transported out of
the axon
plasma
The following events result in the creation of a
resting potential:
O,
O, membrane
3Na+ @
Sodium ions (Na+) are actively transported
Nat-KW
out of the axon whereas potassium ions (K™)
M pump WA
are actively transported into the axon by a
specific intrinsic protein known as the sodium-
ion channel potassium ions potassium ion channels open
and so potassium ions diffuse
closed
actively
potassium pump. However, their movement
transported
back out of the axon
is not equal. For every three sodium ions
into the axon
cytoplasm of axon ©
that are pumped out, two potassium ions are
pumped in.
A Figure 1 Axon membrane during a resting potential
As a result there are more sodium ions outside the membrane than
inside the axon cytoplasm, whereas there are more potassium ions
inside the cytoplasm than outside the axon. Therefore, sodium
ions diffuse back into the axon down its electrochemical gradient
(this is the name given to a concentration gradient of ions),
whereas potassium ions diffuse out of the axon.
However, most of the 'gated' sodium ion channels are closed,
preventing the movement of sodium ions, whereas many
potassium ion channels are open, thus allowing potassium ions
to diffuse out of the axon. Therefore, there are more positively
charged ions outside the axon than inside the cell. This creates the
resting potential across the membrane of -70mV, with the inside
negative relative to the outside.
of axon
0
sodium
©
2K+
349
13
13.4 Nervous transmission
action potential
+
+
+
+
+
+
I
ET +
+
+
Action potential
When a stimulus is detected by a sensory receptor, the
energy of the stimulus temporarily reverses the charges on
the axon membrane. As a result the potential difference
across the membrane rapidly changes and becomes
positively charged at approximately +40 mV. This is known
as depolarisation - a change in potential difference from
negative to positive. As the impulse passes repolarisation
then occurs - a change in potential difference from positive
back to negative. The neurone returns to its resting potential.
direction of impulse
> +40
polarised
(resting
potential)
hyper-
polarisation
axon membrane potential difference/mV
repolarised (resting
potential)
depolarisation
repolarisation
An action potential occurs when protein channels in the
axon membrane change shape as a result of the change of
voltage across its membrane. The change in protein shape
depolarised
results in the channel opening or closing. These channels are
(action
known as voltage-gated ion channels.
-65+
2 potential)
Figure 2 shows the changes in potential difference which
0 1 2 3
occur across the axon membrane during an action potential.
time/ms
The numbers on the graph correspond to the sequence of
Figure 2 Change in potential difference across an
axon membrane during an action potential
events that take place during an action potential:
1 The neurone has a resting potential - it is not transmitting an
impulse. Some potassium ion channels are open (mainly those
that are not voltage-gated) but sodium voltage-gated ion channels
are closed.
The energy of the stimulus triggers some sodium voltage-gated
ion channels to open, making the membrane more permeable
to sodium ions. Sodium ions therefore diffuse into the axon
down their electrochemical gradient. This makes the inside of the
neurone less negative.
3
This change in charge causes more sodium ion channels to open,
allowing more sodium ions to diffuse into the axon. This is an
example of positive feedback.
4 When the potential difference reaches approximately +40 mV
the voltage-gated sodium ion channels close and voltage-gated
potassium ion channels open. Sodium ions can no longer
enter the axon, but the membrane is now more permeable to
potassium ions.
5
Potassium ions diffuse out of the axon down their electrochemical
gradient. This reduces the charge, resulting in the inside of the
axon becoming more negative than the outside.
Initially, lots of potassium ions diffuse out of the axon, resulting
in the inside of the axon becoming more negative (relative to
the outside) than in its normal resting state. This is known as
hyperpolarisation. The voltage-gated potassium channels now
close. The sodium-potassium pump causes sodium ions to move
out of the cell, and potassium ions to move in. The axon returns
to its resting potential – it is now repolarised.
350
13.7 Structure and function
of the brain
Specification reference: 5.1.5
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
→ the structure of the human
brain and the functions of
its parts.
An adult human brain contains approximately 86 billion neurones.
The brain is responsible for processing all the information collected
by receptor cells about changes in the internal and external
environment. It also receives and processes information from the
hormonal system through molecules in the blood. It must then
produce a coordinated response.
The advantage of having a central control centre for the whole body
is that communication between the billions of neurones involved
is much faster than if control centres for different functions were
distributed around the body. With the exception of reflex actions, all
other nervous reactions are processed by the brain. You will find out
about reflex actions in Topic 13.8, Reflexes.
skull
- cerebrum
Gross structure
The brain is protected by the skull. It is also surrounded
by protective membranes (called meninges). The human
brain is extremely complex, but the structures you need
to know about are shown in Figure 1.
corpus callosum
hypothalamus
There are five main areas. They are distinguishable by
their shape, colour, or microscopic structure:
cerebellum
medulla oblongata
spinal cord
vertebra
pituitary-
gland
• Cerebrum - controls voluntary actions, such as
learning, memory, personality, and conscious
thought.
Cerebellum - controls unconscious functions such as
posture, balance, and non-voluntary movement.
Medulla oblongata - used in autonomic control, for
example, it controls heart rate and breathing rate.
Hypothalamus - regulatory centre for temperature and
water balance.
Pituitary gland - stores and releases hormones that
regulate many body functions
Figure 1 Main structures in the brain
Different images of the brain
Many different techniques are used to study the brain in order to
understand its function. Figures 2, 3, and 4 all show a cross-section
through the brain. Can you identify the main structures?
362
13
13.10 Sliding filament model
Acetylcholine is then broken down by acetylcholinesterase
into choline and ethanoic acid. This prevents the muscle being
overstimulated. Choline and ethanoic acid diffuse back into the
neurone, where they are recombined into acetylcholine, using the
energy provided by mitochondria.
Sarcoplasm
The depolarisation of the sarcolemma travels deep into the muscle
fibre by spreading through the T-tubules. These are in contact with the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. The sarcoplasmic reticulum contains stored
calcium ions which it actively absorbs from the sarcoplasm.
When the action potential reaches the sarcoplasmic reticulum it
stimulates calcium ion channels to open. The calcium ions diffuse down
their concentration gradient flooding the sarcoplasm with calcium ions.
The calcium ions bind to troponin causing it to change shape. This
pulls on the tropomyosin moving it away from the actin-myosin
binding sites on the actin filament. Now that the binding sites have
been exposed the myosin head binds to the actin filament forming an
actin-myosin cross-bridge.
Once attached to the actin filament the myosin head flexes, pulling
the actin filament along. The molecule of ADP bound to the myosin
head is released. An ATP molecule can now bind to the myosin head.
This causes the head to detach from the actin filament.
The calcium ions present in the sarcoplasm also activate the
ATPase activity of the myosin. This hydrolyses the ATP to ADP and
phosphate, releasing energy which the myosin head uses to return to
its original position.
The myosin head can now attach itself to another actin-myosin
binding site further along the actin filament and the cycle is repeated.
The cycle continues as long as the muscle remains stimulated. During
the period of stimulation many actin-myosin bridges form and break
rapidly, pulling the actin filament along. This shortens the sarcomere
and causes the muscle to contract.
Figure 6 summarises what takes place in the sarcoplasm.
Energy supply during muscle contraction
Muscle contraction requires large quantities of energy. This is provided
by the hydrolosis of ATP into ADP and phosphate. The energy is required
for the movement of the myosin heads and to enable the sarcoplasmic
reticulum to actively reabsorb calcium ions from the sarcoplasm. The
three main ways ATP is generated are described here - many activities
use a combination of these processes.
Aerobic respiration
Most of the ATP used by muscle cells is regenerated from ADP during
oxidative phosphorylation. This chemical reaction takes place inside
the mitochondria which are plentiful in the muscle. However, this can
only occur in the presence of oxygen. Aerobic respiration is therefore
used for long periods of low-intensity exercise.
376
13
13.7 Structure and function of the brain
Cerebellum
This area of the brain is concerned with the control of muscular
movement, body posture, and balance - it does not initiate movement,
but coordinates it. Therefore, if this area of the brain is damaged, a person
suffers from jerky and uncoordinated movement. The cerebellum receives
information from the organs of balance in the ears and information about
the tone of muscles and tendons. It then relays this information to the
areas of the cerebral cortex that are involved in motor control.
Medulla oblongata
The medulla oblongata contains many important regulatory centres
of the autonomic nervous system. These control reflex activities such
as ventilation (breathing rate) and heart rate. It also controls activities
such as swallowing, peristalsis, and coughing,
A Figure 6 A sensory homunculus.
Neurobiologists have constructed
models of the body in which the body
part is made in proportion to the number
of sensory inputs received from it. The
hands and lips are very sensitive, and
therefore they are drawn as particularly
large in relation to other body parts
Hypothalamus
This is the main controlling region for the autonomic nervous system.
It has two centres – one for the parasympathetic and one for the
sympathetic nervous system. It has a number of functions, which include:
Synoptic link
You will find out more about
controlling heart rate in Topic 14.6,
Controlling heart rate.
controlling complex patterns of behaviour, such as feeding,
sleeping, and aggression
monitoring the composition of blood plasma, such as the
concentration of water and blood glucose - therefore it has a very
rich blood supply
producing hormones - it is an endocrine gland, that is, it produces
hormones.
hypothalamus
Pituitary gland
This is found at the base of the hypothalamus. It is approximately the
size of a pea but it controls most of the glands in the body. It is divided
into two sections:
anterior
pituitary
posterior
pituitary
Anterior pituitary (front section) - produces six hormones
including follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which is involved in
reproduction and growth hormones.
Posterior pituitary (back section) - stores and releases hormones
produced by the hypothalamus, such as ADH involved in urine
production.
A Figure 7 Structure of the pituitary gland
Summary questions
1 State the difference between the function of the
anterior pituitary and the posterior pituitary. (1 mark)
2 Sounds are interpreted by the auditory area in
the temporal lobe. State the pathway followed
by a nervous impulse produced by a
sound wave.
(3 marks)
3 A patient displays three symptoms: asynergia - a
lack of coordination in their motor movement,
adiadochokinesia - an inability to perform rapid
movements, and ataxic gait - staggering movements.
Suggest and explain which part of the brain may have
been damaged to cause these symptoms. (2 marks)
364
13
13.10 Sliding filament model
Anaerobic respiration
In a very active muscle, oxygen is used up more quickly than the blood
supply can replace it. Therefore, ATP has to be generated anaerobically.
ATP is made by glycolysis but, as no oxygen is present, the pyruvate which
is also produced is converted into lactate (lactic acid). This can quickly
build up in the muscles resulting in muscle fatigue. Anaerobic respiration
is used for short periods of high-intensity exercise, such as sprinting.
Synoptic link
Creatine phosphate
Another way the body can generate ATP is by using the chemical
creatine phosphate which is stored in muscle. To form ATP, ADP has
to be phosphorylated - a phosphate group has to be added. Creatine
phosphate acts as a reserve supply of phosphate, which is available
immediately to combine with ADP, reforming ATP. This system
generates ATP rapidly, but the store of phosphate is used up quickly.
As a result this is used for short bursts of vigorous exercise, such as a
tennis serve. When the muscle is relaxed, the creatine phosphate store
is replenished using phosphate from ATP.
You will study in detail the
chemical reactions which take
place during respiration in
Chapter 18, Respiration.
Monitoring muscle activity with sensors 2
Sensors can be used to monitor the electrical activity in a
muscle. These can be used to measure the strength of a
muscle contraction, or to track muscle fatigue levels.
The resultant trace, an electromyogram (EMG), is a record
of the electrical activity in a muscle during an activity.
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
sensor p.d./mV
OOOhhiamo
uouououou
Figure 7 EMG sensor trace from a
biceps muscle. The subject is applying a
gradually increasing force, which results
1 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 in a larger output trace on the EMG,
time/s
p.d = partial discharge
Muscle fatigue is a long-lasting reduction of the ability The detection and classification of muscle fatigue is
to contract and exert force. It is normally localised important in research into human-computer interactions,
and occurs after prolonged, relatively strong muscle sport injuries and performance, ergonomics, and prosthetics.
activity. Occasionally, this can be beneficial, through
A typical experiment in muscle fatigue research involves
promoting muscle growth (as seen in bodybuilders).
a subject performing a set task such as moving a limb in
However, it is usually harmful - serious injury is most
a specified manner. A signal is acquired using sensors
likely to occur when the level of fatigue in a muscle
attached to the skin, which is recorded and processed
is high.
to reveal the characteristics of the muscle during that
particular exercise.
378
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
1 Tropomyosin molecule prevents myosin head from attaching
to the binding site on the actin molecule.
myosin filament
5 ATP molecule fixes to myosin head, causing it to detach
from the actin filament.
myosin head
troponin
ADP
troponin
actin filament
tropomyosin molecule
blocking binding site
2 Calcium ions released from the endoplasmic reticulum cause
the tropomyosin molecule to pull away from the binding sites on
the actin molecule.
6 Hydrolysis of ATP to ADP by myosin provides the energy
for the myosin head to resume its normal position.
binding site
Ca2+ binds
to troponin
myosin head
ADP
myosin head resumes
normal position
troponin
Ca2+
direction of movement of tropomyosin
3 Myosin head now attaches to the binding site on the actin
filament.
7 Head of myosin reattaches to a binding site further along
the actin filament and the cycle is repeated.
myosin head fixed
into binding site
of actin filament
new point of
attachment
ADP
ADP
troponin
troponin
4 Head of myosin changes angle, moving the actin filament
along as it does so. The ADP molecule is released.
myosin head
changes angle
troponin
ADP
actin filament moves to the left
A Figure 6 Interaction of myosin and actin during muscle contraction. Only one myosin head is shown for simplicity
377
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Figure 2 Photo of the brain.
Images like this have been taken
during autopsies. The position of
a lesion caused as a result of an
accident, tumour, or stroke can be
linked to observed changes in a
patient's behaviour or capabilities
before their death
Figure 4 Computerised tomography (CT)
scan of the brain. A CT scan uses a series of
X-rays to create detailed three-dimensional
images of the inside of the body
A Figure 3 Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the brain. MRI is used to investigate
the structure of the brain. A specialised version
of MRI, called functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), has been developed which
allows the brain to be studied during activity.
Active areas of the brain can be identified due
to increased blood flow
Cerebrum
frontal lobe
parietal lobe
The cerebrum receives sensory information, interprets it with respect
to that stored from previous experiences, and then sends impulses
along motor neurones to effectors to produce an appropriate response.
It is responsible for coordinating all of the body's voluntary responses
as well as some involuntary ones.
The cerebrum is highly convoluted, which increases its surface area
considerably and therefore its capacity for complex activity. It is split into
left and right halves known as the cerebral hemispheres. Each hemisphere
controls one half of the body, and has discrete areas which perform specific
functions - these areas are mirrored in each hemisphere. The outer layer
of the cerebral hemispheres is known as the cerebral cortex. It is 2-4mm
thick. The most sophisticated processes such as reasoning and decision-
making occur in the frontal and prefrontal lobe of the cerebral cortex.
occipital
lobe
temporal
lobe
medulla
oblongata
cerebellum
Figure 5 The folded structure of the
cerebral cortex viewed from the left side
Each sensory area within the cerebral hemispheres receives information
from receptor cells located in sense organs. The size of the sensory area
allocated is in proportion to the relative number of receptor cells present
in the body part. The information is then passed on to other areas of the
brain, known as association areas, to be analysed and acted upon. Impulses
come into the motor areas where motor neurones send out impulses, for
example, to move skeletal muscles. The size of the motor area allocated
is in proportion to the relative number of motor endings in it. The main
region which controls movement is the primary motor cortex located at
the back of the frontal lobe.
In the base of the brain, impulses from each side of the body cross-
therefore the left hemisphere receives impulses from the right-hand
side of the body, and the right hemisphere receives impulses from the
left-hand side of the body. For example, inputs from the eye pass to
the visual area in the occipital lobe. Impulses from the right side of
the field of vision in each eye are sent to the visual cortex in the left
hemisphere, whereas impulses from the left side of the field of vision
are sent to the right hemisphere. Through the integration of these
inputs the brain is able to judge distance and perspective.
363
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Blinking reflex
The blinking reflex is an
axon of motor
involuntary blinking of the
neurones
eyelid muscle
(7th cranial
eyelids (Figure 4). It occurs
nerve)
when the cornea is stimulated,
for example, by being touched.
Its purpose is to keep the cornea
safe from damage due to foreign
touch
bodies such as dust or flying
insects entering the eye - this
type of response is known as the
corneal reflex. A blink reflex also
axon of sensory neurone
occurs when sounds greater than
(5th cranial nerve)
40-60 dB are heard, or as a result
A Figure 4 The blinking reflex
of very bright light. Blinking as a
reaction to over-bright light (to protect the lens and retina) is known
as the optical reflex. The blinking reflex is a cranial reflex - it occurs
in the brain, not the spinal cord.
lower brain stem
sclera
lens
choroid
When the cornea of the eye is irritated by a foreign
body, the stimulus triggers an impulse along a sensory
neurone (the fifth cranial nerve). The impulse then
passes through a relay neurone in the lower brain
stem. Impulses are then sent along branches of the
motor neurone (the seventh cranial nerve) to initiate
a motor response to close the eyelids. The reflex
initiates a consensual response - this means that both
eyes are closed in response to the stimulus.
retina
fovea
aqueous humour
pupil
iris
conjunctiva
cornea
blind spot
optic nerve
vitreous humour
Figure 5 Structure of the eye
The blinking reflex is very rapid - it occurs in around
one tenth of a second.
Doctors test for the blinking reflex when examining unconscious
patients. If this reflex is present, it indicates that the lower brain stem is
functioning. This procedure is therefore used as part of an assessment
to determine whether or not a patient is brain-dead - if the corneal
reflex is present the person cannot be diagnosed as brain-dead.
Measuring reaction time
0
When a person catches a falling object, at least part of this
response is a reflex reaction. Measuring the time taken to
catch a falling object can therefore be used to measure a
person's reaction time.
To measure the reaction time, a suitable scale is placed
onto the ruler which converts the distance dropped by the
ruler into a reaction time. One investigation which can be
carried out using this approach is to measure the effect of
caffeine concentration on a person's reaction time.
1 State two variables which should be controlled
when carrying out this investigation.
2 Explain why, in this investigation, only part of this
response is a reflex action'.
3 Plan an investigation into how the concentration of
caffeine affects a person's reaction time.
367
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Summary questions
1 Describe simply the structure of skeletal muscle.
(3 marks)
2
A Figure 7 shows an image of skeletal muscle viewed under an
electron microscope. Name the structures labelled A-D. (4 marks)
3 Describe the similarities and differences in the structure and
function of cardiac and involuntary muscle.
(4 marks)
4 The drawings in Figure 10 show myofibrils in transverse section.
a Describe the difference between taking a transverse and a
longitudinal section of muscle.
(1 mark)
b State and explain which section through a sarcomere is
represented by each image in Figure 10.
(4 marks)
Figure 10 Transverse sections of striated muscle
373
13.10 Sliding filament model
Specification reference: 5.1.5
In the previous topic, you looked in detail at the structure of skeletal
muscle fibres. In order to contract and cause movement, the actin
and myosin filaments within the myofibrils have to slide past each
other. Muscle contraction is usually described using the sliding
filament model.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the structure of mammalian
muscle and the mechanism
of muscular contraction
the examination of stained
sections or photomicrographs
of skeletal muscle.
Sliding filament model
During contraction the myosin filaments pull the actin filaments
inwards towards the centre of the sarcomere. This results in:
a relaxed muscle
the light band becoming narrower
the Z lines moving closer together, shortening the
sarcomere
• the H-zone becoming narrower.
The dark band remains the same width, as the myosin
filaments themselves have not shortened, but now
overlap the actin filaments by a greater amount.
light band
light band
dark band
Z-line
Z-line
H-zone
myosin
actin
light band shortens,
indicating actin
slides along myosin
dark band remains
the same length
Figure 1 Electron micrograph of relaxed and
contracted sarcomeres
The simultaneous contraction of lots of sarcomeres
means that the myofibrils and muscle fibres contract.
This results in enough force to pull on a bone and
cause movement. When sarcomeres return to their
original length the muscle relaxes.
sarcomere contracts
b contracted muscle
Figure 2 Comparison of a relaxed
and contracted sarcomere
Structure of myosin
Myosin filaments have globular heads that are hinged which allows
them to move back and forwards. On the head is a binding site for
each of actin and ATP. The tails of several hundred myosin molecules
are aligned together to form the myosin filament.
myosin
filament
myosin
head
myosin filament - the heads of the myosin molecule
protrude, while the tails wrap around one another to
form the filament
► Figure 3 Myosin structure
myosin tail
myosin molecule
374
13
13.8 Reflexes
When carrying out this investigation, a researcher may
choose to give a placebo caffeine drink to some of the
people being tested. This is a drink labelled as a caffeine
drink, but contains no caffeine.
Explain why a researcher may choose to give
some people being tested a placebo.
Figure 6 Testing a
person's reaction time
Survival importance
Reflexes are essential for survival as they avoid the body being
harmed, or reduce the severity of any damage. For example, the iris
contracts the pupil in bright light to prevent damage to the retina. In
dim light, the reverse occurs to enable you to see as much as possible.
Reflexes increase your chances of survival by:
Being involuntary responses - the decision-making regions of the
brain are not involved, therefore the brain is able to deal with more
complex responses. It prevents the brain from being overloaded with
situations in which the response is always the same.
Not having to be learnt - they are present at birth and therefore
provide immediate protection.
Extremely fast - the reflex arc is very short. It normally only
involves one or two synapses, which are the slowest part of nervous
transmission.
Many reflexes are what we would consider everyday actions, such
as those which keep us upright (and thus not falling over), and
those which control digestion.
Summary questions
1 State the reflex arc which occurs when a doctor tests
the knee-jerk reflex.
(1 mark)
ate and explain the considerations a
researcher should take into account when planning
an investigation into the effect of drugs, such as
caffeine, on a group of human volunteers. (4 marks)
2 Which of the following actions are reflexes
a gagging
b speaking
c jumping
d pupil dilation.
(1 mark)
3 State and explain how a reflex action can improve an
organism's chances of survival.
(2 marks)
368
13.6 Organisation of the
nervous system
Specification reference: 5.1.5
In the last few topics, you have looked in detail at how nervous
impulses are transmitted around the nervous system - how are the
billions of neurones in your nervous system organised?
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
► the organisation of the
mammalian nervous system.
Structural organisation
The mammalian nervous system is organised structurally into
two systems:
Central nervous system (CNS) - this consists of your brain and
spinal cord.
Peripheral nervous system (PNS) - this consists of all the
neurones that connect the CNS to the rest of the body. These
are the sensory neurones which carry nerve impulses from the
receptors to the CNS, and the motor neurones which carry nerve
impulses away from the CNS to the effectors.
Functional organisation
The nervous system is also functionally organised into two systems:
Study tip
Although primarily unconscious,
many aspects of the autonomic
nervous system can come under
conscious control. For example,
people can choose to hold their
breath or swallow rapidly. When
people do not actively choose
to control these functions, the
autonomic nervous system takes
over and controls them. This frees up
the conscious areas of the brain-it
would be hard to think of much else if
you had to concentrate on breathing
and keeping your heart beating.
Somatic nervous system - this system is under conscious
control - it is used when you voluntarily decide to do something.
For example, when you decide to move a muscle to move your arm.
The somatic nervous system carries impulses to the body's muscles.
Autonomic nervous system - this system works constantly.
It is under subconscious control and is used when the body does
something automatically without you deciding to do it - it is
involuntary. For example, to cause the heart to beat, or to digest
food. The autonomic nervous system carries nerve impulses to
glands, smooth muscle (for example, in the walls of the intestine),
and cardiac muscle.
The autonomic nervous system is then further divided by function into
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. Generally, if the
outcome increases activity it involves the sympathetic nervous system -
for example, an increase in heart rate. If the outcome decreases activity
it involves the parasympathetic nervous system - for example, a
decrease in heart or breathing rate after a period of exercise.
Table 1 Examples of the effects of
sympathetic and parasympathetic
stimulation. Note that most of these
result in opposite effects on the body
Structure
salivary glands
Sympathetic stimulation
saliva production reduced
bronchial muscle relaxed
decreased urine secretion
Parasympathetic stimulation
saliva production increased
bronchial muscle contracted
increased urine secretion
lung
kidney
stomach
peristalsis reduced
peristalsis reduced
gastric juice secreted
digestion increased
small intestine
360
13
13.9 Voluntary and involuntary muscles
capillaries
myocyte nuclei
Histology of skeletal muscle
Figure 9 is a stained section of skeletal muscle viewed through a
microscope. You should be able to identify the following features:
Individual muscle fibres - long and thin multinucleated fibres that
are crossed with a regular pattern of fine red and white lines.
The highly structured arrangement of sarcomeres which appear as
dark (A-bands) and light (I-bands) bands.
Streaks of connective and adipose tissue.
Capillaries running in between the fibres.
A-bands
l-bands
(dark)
(light)
A Figure 9 Stained skeletal muscle
as seen through a microscope, 570
magnification
T
Slow-twitch and fast-twitch muscles
There are two types of muscle fibres found in your body. Different muscles in
the body have different proportions of each fibre.
Properties of slow-twitch fibres:
fibres contract slowly
• provide less powerful contractions but over a longer period
used for endurance activities as they do not tire easily
• gain their energy from aerobic respiration
. rich in myoglobin, a bright red protein which stores oxygen - this makes
the fibres appear red
• rich supply of blood vessels and mitochondria.
Slow-twitch fibres are found in large proportions in muscles which help to
maintain posture such as those in the back and calf muscles which have to
contract continuously to keep the body upright.
Properties of fast-twitch fibres:
fibres contract very quickly
produce powerful contractions but only for short periods
used for short bursts of speed and power as they tire easily
gain their energy from anaerobic respiration
pale coloured as they have low levels of myoglobin and blood vessels
• contain more, and thicker, myosin filaments
• store creatine phosphate - a molecule that can rapidly generate ATP
from ADP in anaerobic conditions.
Fast-twitch fibres are found in high proportions in muscles which need short
bursts of intense activity, such as biceps and eyes.
1
A State and explain how you could tell the difference between
areas of fast-twitch and slow-twitch muscle when observing skeletal
muscle under the microscope.
State and explain any differences in composition which may exist in
the skeletal muscles of marathon runners and sprinters.
2
372
13
13.8 Reflexes
Spinal cord
The spinal cord is a column of nervous tissues running up the back. It
is surrounded by the spine for protection. At intervals along the spinal
cord pairs of neurones emerge, as shown in Figure 2.
sensory neurone
relay neurone
contains
sensory
neurones
contains motor neurones
from receptor
spinal nerve
motor neurone
effector
A Figure 2 Section through a spinal cord showing the neurones in a reflex arc
Knee-jerk reflex
The knee-jerk reflex is a reflex commonly tested by doctors. It is a
spinal reflex - this means that the neural circuit only goes up to the
spinal cord, not the brain.
When the leg is tapped just below the kneecap (patella), it stretches
the patellar tendon and acts as a stimulus. This stimulus initiates
a reflex arc that causes the extensor muscle on top of the thigh
to contract. At the same time, a relay neurone inhibits the motor
neurone of the flexor muscle, causing it to relax. This contraction,
coordinated with the relaxation of the antagonistic flexor hamstring
muscle, causes the leg to kick.
After the tap of a hammer, the leg is normally extended once and comes
to rest. The absence of this reflex may indicate nervous problems and
multiple oscillation of the leg may be a sign of a cerebellar disease.
extensor muscles
axon of sensory
neurones
cell body of sensory neurone
cell bodies of
motor neurones
segment of
spinal cord
patellar
tendon
flexor
muscles
relay neurone
axons of
motor neurones
A Figure 3 The knee-jerk reflex
This reflex is used by the body to help maintain posture and balance,
allowing you to remain balanced with little effort or conscious thought.
366
13.8 Reflexes
Specification reference: 5.1.5
When the body is in danger, it can respond to situations without
conscious thought. This causes a faster response, preventing or
minimising damage to the body. This is known as a reflex action.
A reflex is an involuntary response to a sensory stimulus.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the reflex actions.
Reflex arc
The pathway of neurones involved in a reflex action is known as a
reflex arc. Most reflexes follow the same steps between the stimulus
and the response:
Receptor - detects stimulus and creates an action potential in the
sensory neurone.
Sensory neurone - carries impulse to spinal cord.
Relay neurone - connects the sensory neurone to the motor
neurone within the spinal cord or brain.
Motor neurone - carries impulse to the effector to carry out the
appropriate response.
Figure 1 illustrates what happens when you touch a hot candle - this
is known as a withdrawal reflex. Before your brain registers that your
hand is hot, the muscles in your arm have already pulled your hand
away from the danger, minimising damage to your hand.
5 motor neurone
passes impulses
to the muscle
7 response
hand is moved
quickly away
from flame
transverse section
through spinal cord
(magnified five times
in relation to man)
6 effector
contracts
1 stimulus
heat from
candle flame
4 relay neurone
passes impulses
across the spinal
cord
2 thermoreceptor
in skin detects
heat
3 sensory neurone
passes nerve
impulses to spinal cord
Figure 1 Reflex arc involved in the withdrawal of the hand from a heat stimulus
365
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
Myofibrils have alternating light and dark bands - these result in their
striped appearance:
myosin
filament
OO
Light bands - these areas appear light as they are the region where
the actin and myosin filaments do not overlap. (They are also
known as isotopic bands or l-bands.)
Dark bands - these areas appear dark because of the presence
of thick myosin filaments. The edges are particularly dark as
the myosin is overlapped with actin. (They are also known as
anisotropic bands or A-bands.)
Z-line - this is a line found at the centre of each light band. The
distance between adjacent Z-lines is called a sarcomere. The
sarcomere is the functional unit of the myofibril. When a muscle
contracts the sarcomere shortens.
H-zone - this is a lighter coloured region found in the centre of
each dark band. Only myosin filaments are present at this point.
When the muscle contracts the H-zone decreases.
Oooooo
OOOooo
OOOOOO
Oooooo
Oo oo
OOOOOO
actin
filament
Figure 5 Transverse section through a
myofibril, approx 50 000 magnification
one sarcomere
Drawing a labelled diagram of a sarcomere
Key points you should remember when drawing and labelling a
sarcomere are:
light band Z-line dark band
A Figure 6 The structure of a myofibril
Show two Z-lines to demonstrate your understanding of the length of a
sarcomere.
Sarcomere
• Ensure there are heads present on the
myosin filaments.
Connect actin filaments to the Z-line.
Clearly label the light and dark bands.
. Show the position of the H-zone.
It is useful to note the position of the
A band, I band, H zone, and Z-line
but you do not need to learn them.
A Figure 7 TEM of skeletal muscle, 5000 magnification
light
dark band
band
light
band
SS SSH-zonerse
thick myosin
filaments
thin actin
filaments
Z-line
sarcomere
Z-line
A Figure 8 The structure of a sarcomere
Why are there light bands within a sarcomere?
371
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
13
Effects of drugs on synapses
Many recreational and medical drugs cause their effects
by acting on synapses. This will result in the nervous
system being stimulated or inhibited.
SOLG
ISIO
MOHA
Bu öz
NZOHd
Drugs that stimulate the nervous system create more
action potentials in postsynaptic neurones, resulting in an
enhanced response. For example, if the targeted synapse
is with a neurone that transmits an impulse from a sound
receptor, the body will perceive a louder sound. These
drugs may work by:
SORE
VISIO
Figure 5 Prozac is used to treat
depression. It acts on neurotransmitters
in synapses in the brain
Binding to specific receptors on the post-synaptic
membrane of some neurones and changing the
shape of the receptor such that binding of the
neurotransmitter increases. This therefore increases
activity. An example of this is alcohol binding to
GABA, receptors.
Mimicking the shape of the neurotransmitter - nicotine is
the same shape as acetylcholine. It can therefore bind to
acetylcholine receptors on the postsynaptic membrane
and trigger action potentials in the postsynaptic neurone.
Stimulating the release of more neurotransmitter. For
example, amphetamines.
Inhibiting the enzyme responsible for breaking down
the neurotransmitter in the synapse. For example,
nerve gases stop acetylcholine being broken down.
This can result in a loss of muscle control.
Drugs that inhibit the nervous system create fewer
action potentials in postsynaptic neurones, resulting in a
reduced response. For example, if the targeted synapse
is with a neurone that transmits an impulse from a sound
receptor, the body will perceive a quieter sound. These
drugs may work by:
synaps for brea
etylch
State the difference between the result of an
inhibitory and a stimulatory drug that acts on the
nervous system.
2 Explain how amphetamines will affect the nervous
system.
3 Explain how alcohol affects the nervous system.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter involved in the
regulation of sleep and other emotional states. Low
levels of serotonin are found in patients suffering
from depression. Prozac is an example of a drug
used to treat depression. It works be blocking
the reuptake of serotonin into the presynaptic
neurone. Using your knowledge of synapses,
explain how Prozac causes its effects.
Blocking receptors - this means the neurotransmitter
can no longer bind and activate the receptor. For
example, curare blocks acetylcholine receptors at
neuromuscular junctions. The muscle cells cannot
therefore be stimulated, and the person suffers from
paralysis.
Summary questions
1 State what is meant by a synapse.
(1 mark)
2 Explain how synapses ensure impulses are only transmitted
in one direction.
(2 marks)
3 Describe one similarity and one difference between temporal
and spatial summation.
(2 marks)
4 Explain in detail how a motor neurone causes a postsynaptic
neurone to depolarise.
(6 marks)
359
13
NEURONAL COMMUNICATION
CT scans use X-rays to produce multiple
images building up a detailed, three-
dimensional picture of the brain. An injection
of a dye into one of the veins in the arm
can be administered during the scan to help
improve the clarity of the image.
b Explain how the dye improves the clarity
of the images produced. (2 marks)
MRI scans use a strong magnetic field and
radio waves to produce a detailed picture of
the brain. A dye can also be used to improve
scan images.
The photos show two brain scans performed
on patients after admission to hospital with
suspected strokes.
a (i) Name the structures labelled A, F, G,
and H.
(4 marks)
State the name of the process that
results in the release of F into the
synaptic cleft.
(1 mark)
Structure B is a serotonin transporter (SERT)
that transports serotonin back into the
synaptic knob. Structure P is a drug that is
used to treat depression.
b (i) Explain why serotonin needs to be
removed from a synapse after it has
been released.
(2 marks)
(ii) Suggest the action of drug P on
the synapse in the diagram and
explain how this would improve the
symptoms of depression. (4 marks)
Fluoxetine is an example of a drug used in
the treatment of depression. Fluoxetine only
inhibits the reuptake of serotonin. It is known as
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).
Cocaine, a drug of misuse, also inhibits
the reuptake of serotonin as well as
the neurotransmitters dopamine and
noradrenaline.
C Discuss why cocaine is not used to treat
depression.
(4 marks)
When patients arrive at hospital with a
suspected stroke they are usually given an
MRI or CT brain scan. Doctors need to find
out as much information as possible to help
with the diagnosis.
Strokes are often diagnosed by studying
images of the brain produced during these
brain scans. New guidelines have suggested
that doctors should use MRI scans to diagnose
strokes instead of CT scans.
MRI scans are better at detecting stroke
damage caused by a lack of blood flow (usually
due to a blockage or a blood clot) in the brain
compared to CT scans. The majority of strokes
are caused by a lack of blood flow in the brain.
There is only a short time that treatment used
to reverse the damage is effective.
In diffusion MRI, the movement of water in
brain tissue is measured. The movement of
water is restricted in damaged tissue.
a Suggest why the movement of water is
restricted in damaged tissue. (2 marks)
4
The photo on the left shows a functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan of the
brain of a 32 year old woman after a massive
stroke. This scan shows the amount of blood
flow received by areas of the brain. Green and
blue areas are receiving normal blood flow,
while yellow, red, and black are receiving
abnormal blood flow. The lack of blood flow
in the right hemisphere is due to a blocked
right internal carotid artery. The photo on the
right shows a coloured computed tomography
(CT) scan of a section through a patient's brain
showing internal bleeding (red) due to a stroke.
c Describe the differences between the two
images.
(3 marks)
d Outline the advantages and disadvantages
of MRI and CT scans.
(4 marks)
e Suggest why a CT scan may still be
recommended if an MRI scanner is not
immediately available for patients that
require an emergency injection to break
up blood clots.
(2 marks)
381
