15
15.7 Urine and diagnosis
positive pregnancy test
immobilised
monoclonal
antibodies
bind to mobile
antibodies
immobilised
monoclonal
antibodies
only bind to
hCG/mobile
antibody
complex
The urine carries on along the test structure until
excess
mobile antibodies
it reaches a window.
bind to immobilised
antibodies to
Here there are immobilised monoclonal antibodies
form coloured
arranged in a line or a pattern such as a positive
line whether
the woman is
(+) sign that only bind to the hCG/antibody
pregnant or not
complex. If the woman is pregnant, a coloured
line or pattern appears in the first window.
The urine continues up through the test to a
hCG/mobile antibody second window.
complex bind to
o immobilised antibodies Here there is usually a line of immobilised
to form coloured line
monoclonal antibodies that bind only to the
if woman is pregnant
mobile antibodies, regardless of whether they are
> hCG molecules
bound to hCG or not. This coloured line forms
bind to mobile regardless of whether the woman is pregnant - it
antibodies to
simply indicates that the test is working.
form hCG/antibody
> complex
If the woman is pregnant, two coloured patterns
hCG molecules
appear. If she is not pregnant, only one appears.
carried up test
in urine
Urine and anabolic steroids
mobile
antibodies
to hCG
GCG
hCG ACC
hCG molecules
in urine of
pregnant
woman
hCG hCG
wick (dipped
in urine)
A Figure 3 The presence of hCG in the urine can be
Athletes and body builders may try to cheat by using
picked up using monoclonal antibodies to produce an
anabolic steroids. Anabolic steroids are drugs that
easy-to-use and very accurate pregnancy test
mimic the action of the male sex hormone testosterone
and they stimulate the growth of muscles. They are, however, excreted
Summary questions in the urine. By testing the urine using gas chromatography and mass
spectrometry, scientists can show that an individual has been using these
1 Why is urine so useful for
drugs, which are banned in all sports. The urine sample is vaporised with
diagnostic tests? (3 marks) a known solvent and passed along a tube. The lining of the tube absorbs
2 The professional bodies of different
the gases and is analysed to give a chromatogram that can be read to
sports carry out random urine
show the presence of the drugs.
testing both during training and
Urine and drug testing
competition. The winning athletes
always have their urine tested.
Urine is tested for the presence of many different drugs, including alcohol.
a Urine samples are divided into
Because drugs or metabolites - the breakdown products of drugs - are
two and only one of them is
filtered through the kidneys and stored in the bladder, it is possible to find
tested initially. Explain why.
drug traces in the urine some time after a drug has been used.
(4 marks)
If someone is suspected of having taken an illegal drug, they may be
b Why do you think urine tests
asked to provide a urine sample and this will be divided into two. The
are carried out at random
first sample may be tested by an immunoassay, using monoclonal
during training as well as at antibodies to bind to the drug or its breakdown product. If this shows
competitions? (3 marks)
positive, the second sample may be run through a gas chromatograph/
3 a Compare the process of
mass spectrometer to confirm the presence of the drug. A wide range of
drugs can be detected in the urine in this way as illustrated in Table 1.
pregnancy tests with the
process of testing for illegal
Table 1
drugs.
(3 marks)
Substance
Time it persists in the urine
b Some pregnancy tests come
ethanol (alcohol)
6-24 hours
with two tests. Explain how a
amphetamines
1-3 days
pregnancy test might show a
false-negative result. (3 marks)
cannabis
22 hours to 30 days depending on use
cocaine
2-5 days
432
15
Chapter 15 Practice questions
amino acid
process C
Practice questions
1 The Cori cycle is the name given to the
metabolic pathway that recycles the lactate
produced during anaerobic respiration.
The diagram summarises the production of
lactate and the Cori cycle.
ammonia
compound D
citrulline
ornithine
glucose
A
lactate
Misce
compound E
compound F
arginine
glucose
lactate
blood
H2O
glucose
c
lactate
glycogen
Using the diagram identify:
Process C
Compound D
Compound E
Compound F
(4 marks)
OCR F214 2010 (apart from a)
The diagram represent a vertical section
through a mammalian kidney.
3
a (i) Name the processes occurring at A
and C in the diagram
(2 marks)
(ii) Name the molecule B. (1 mark)
(iii) Name the organ D.
(1 mark)
b Suggest why the Cori cycle is important
for homeostasis.
(4 marks)
It was believed for many years that lactate
was a toxic waste product. In the 1970's this
began to be questioned and the phrase 'lactic
acid, friend or foe' was coined.
C Discuss the phrase 'lactic acid, friend
or foe'.
(5 marks)
The light micrograph shows a section through
a human liver.
T =
2
a Name: region P, structure Q, structure R,
structure S, and structure T (5 marks)
b (i) Draw a labelled diagram of a
glomerulus and Bowman's capsule.
(4 marks)
(ii) Outline the roles of the structures
you have drawn in the process of
ultrafiltration.
(4 marks)
c Nephritis is a condition in which the
tissue of the glomerulus and proximal
convoluted tubule becomes inflamed and
damaged.
a Name the structures shown by A and B
(2 marks)
b The diagram outlines the formation of
urea in the liver.
438
15
HOMEOSTASIS
Summary questions
The main source of donor kidneys is from people who die suddenly,
often from road accidents, strokes, and heart attacks. In the UK,
organs can be taken from people if they carry an organ donor card or
are on the online donor register. Alternatively, a relative of someone
who has died suddenly can give his or her consent.
Unfortunately for people needing a transplant, there is a shortage of
donor kidneys. Many people do not register as donors. In addition,
as cars become safer, fewer people die suddenly in traffic accidents.
Whilst good, this means there are fewer potential donors. At any one
time there are thousands of people undergoing kidney dialysis. Most
will not have the opportunity to have a kidney transplant. In 2013-14,
3257 people in the UK had kidney transplants. However, there were
still around 6000 people on dialysis waiting for a kidney. There are
increasing numbers of live donor transplants, where a family member
of someone with a tissue match donates a kidney. In 2013-14, 2143
people received kidneys from donors who had died, and 1114 were
from living donors.
In 2011, scientists grew functioning embryonic kidney tissue from
stem cells. Going forward, the hope is that whole new kidneys can be
grown - perhaps even without the antigens which trigger the immune
reaction so that patients don't need to take immunosuppressant drugs.
1 a Why is kidney failure such a
threat to life? (3 marks)
b On what process does
dialysis depend? (1 mark)
2 Produce a flow chart to
describe how a dialysis
machine works. (6 marks)
3 Sometimes a live donor,
usually a close family member,
will donate a kidney. These
transplants have a higher rate of
success than normal transplants
from dead, unrelated donors.
a Suggest two reasons why
live transplants from a close
family member have a higher
success rate than normal
transplants. (2 marks)
b Why do you think that live
donor transplants are still
the minority? (2 marks)
4 a Explain the importance of
dialysis fluid containing no
urea and normal plasma
levels of salt, glucose, and
minerals. (4 marks)
b Both blood and dialysis fluid
are constantly circulated
through the dialysis
machine. Explain why it is
important that the blood and
dialysis fluid flow in opposite
directions and that there
is a constant circulation of
dialysis fluid. (3 marks)
c Why can patients with kidney
failure eat and drink what
they like during the first few
hours of dialysis? (2 marks)
120000
98983
(estimated in 2014)
100000
80000
the number of people
needing a kidney transplant
number of people
60000
40000
the number of
available donors 16900
(estimated in 2013)
20000
1990
1995
2000
year
2005
2010
2015
Figure 4 This graph shows how the gap between people needing a kidney
transplant and the available donors is widening in the US
437
15.7 Urine and diagnosis
Specification reference: 5.1.2
For many centuries people have used urine to try and diagnose
diseases by looking at the colour, the smell, and even the taste of it.
Urine is still a useful diagnostic tool, although our methods of analysis
are more sophisticated.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how excretory products can
be used in medical diagnosis.
Urine samples and diagnostic tests
Urine contains water, urea, mineral salts - and much more. It contains
the breakdown products of a whole range of chemicals, including
hormones and any toxins taken into the body. If you are affected by
one of a number of different diseases, new substances will show up
in your urine. The presence of glucose in the urine is a well-known
symptom of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. If you have muscle damage,
large amounts of creatinine will show up in your urine.
Urine and pregnancy testing
The human embryo implants in the uterus, around six days after
conception. The site of the developing placenta then begins to produce
a chemical called human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). Some of
this hormone is found in the blood and the urine of the mother. Until
the 1960s, the most reliable available pregnancy test was to inject the
urine from a pregnant woman into an African clawed toad (Xenopus
laevis). If she was pregnant, the hCG triggered egg production in the
toad within 8-12 hours of the injection. It could not be used until the
woman was several weeks pregnant.
Figure 1 The mixture of urine and
a toad may not sound very scientific
but the combination made a relatively
accurate and available pregnancy test
for many years
Modern pregnancy tests still test for hCG in the urine, but they rely on
monoclonal antibodies. Some are so sensitive that pregnancy can be
detected within hours of implantation.
Making monoclonal antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies are antibodies from a single clone of cells that
are produced to target particular cells or chemicals in the body.
A mouse is injected with hCG so it makes the appropriate antibody. The
B-cells that make the required antibody are then removed from the
spleen of the mouse and fused with a myeloma, a type of cancer cell
which divides very rapidly. This new fused cell is known as a hybridoma.
Each hybridoma reproduces rapidly, resulting in a clone of millions
of 'living factories' making the desired antibody. These monoclonal
antibodies are collected, purified and used in a variety of ways.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the specific
immune system and antibodies
in Topic 12.6, The specific immune
system.
The main stages in a pregnancy test are as follows:
the wick is soaked in the first urine passed in the morning - this
will have the highest levels of hCG.
The test contains mobile monoclonal antibodies that have very
small coloured beads attached to them. They will only bind to
hCG. If the woman is pregnant the hCG in her urine binds to the
mobile monoclonal antibodies and forms a hCG/antibody complex
(complete with coloured bead).
Figure 2 Pregnancy test
431
15
HOMEOSTASIS
The loss of these substances is prevented by careful control of the dialysis
fluid. It contains normal plasma levels of glucose to ensure there is
no net movement of glucose out of the blood. The dialysis fluid also
contains normal plasma levels of mineral ions, so any excess mineral
ions in the blood move out by diffusion down a concentration gradient
into the dialysis fluid, thus restoring the correct electrolyte balance of
the blood. The dialysis fluid contains no urea meaning there is a very
steep concentration gradient from the blood to the fluid, and as a result,
much of the urea leaves the blood. The blood and the dialysis fluid flow
in opposite directions to maintain a countercurrent exchange system and
maximise the exchange that takes place.
The whole process of dialysis depends on diffusion down concentration
gradients - there is no active transport. Dialysis takes about eight hours
and has to be repeated regularly. Patients with kidney failure who rely on
haemodialysis have to remain attached to a dialysis machine several times
a week for many hours. They also need to manage their diets carefully,
eating relatively little protein and salt and monitoring their fluid intake to
keep their blood chemistry as stable as possible. The only time they can
eat and drink what they like is at the beginning of the dialysis process.
blood cell
fluid
OOOOO
OO
peritoneal
membrane
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis is done inside the body - it makes
use of the natural dialysis membranes formed by the
lining of the abdomen, that is, the peritoneum. It is
usually done at home and the patient can carry on
with their normal life while it takes place. The dialysis
fluid is introduced into the abdomen using a catheter.
It is left for several hours for dialysis to take place
across the peritoneal membranes, so that urea and
excess mineral ions pass out of the blood capillaries,
into the tissue fluid, and out across the peritoneal
membrane into the dialysis fluid. The fluid is then
drained off and discarded, leaving the blood balanced
again and the urea and excess minerals removed.
capillary wall
spinal
column
catheter
fluid
Treating kidney failure by transplant
Long-term dialysis has some serious side effects. The
best solution for the patient is a kidney transplant,
where a single healthy kidney from a donor is placed
within the body. The blood vessels are joined and the
ureter of the new kidney is inserted into the bladder.
If the transplant is successful, the kidney will function
normally for many years.
bladder
bag
The main problem with transplanted organs is the risk
of rejection. The antigens on the donor organ differ
from the antigens on the cells of the recipient and the
immune system is likely to recognise this. This can result
in rejection and the destruction of the new kidney.
Figure 2 Peritoneal dialysis takes place in the body
cavity across the peritoneal membranes
435
15
HOMEOSTASIS
less water
reabsorbed
from nephron
less ADH
produced
The more ADH that is released, the more water
channels are inserted into the membranes of
the tubule cells. This makes it easy for more
water to leave the tubules by diffusion, resulting
in the formation of a small amount of very
concentrated urine. Water is returned to the
capillaries, maintaining the water potential of the
blood and therefore the tissue fluid of the body.
detected by
osmoreceptors
in hypothalamus
larger volume
of dilute
urine produced
water potential
rises
water
potential
falls
normal
solute
concentration
of blood
When ADH levels fall, the reverse happens.
Levels of CAMP fall, then the water channels
are removed from the tubule cell membranes
and enclosed in vesicles again. The collecting
duct becomes impermeable to water once
more, so no water can leave. This results in
the production of large amounts of very dilute
urine, and maintains the water potential of the
blood and the tissue fluid.
water
potential
rises
water potential
falls
smaller volume
of concentrated
urine produced
detected by
osmoreceptors
in hypothalamus
more water
Negative feedback control
more ADH
reabsorbed
from nephron
produced
and ADH
The permeability of the collecting ducts is
A Figure 3 The negative feedback loop that controls the water
controlled to match the water requirements
potential of the blood
of the body very closely. This is brought about
by a complex negative feedback system that
involves osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus
of the brain. These osmoreceptors are sensitive to the concentration of
inorganic ions in the blood and are linked to the release of ADH.
When water is in short supply
When water is in short supply in the body, the concentration of inorganic
ions in the blood rises and the water potential of the blood and tissue
fluid becomes more negative. This is detected by the osmoreceptors in
the hypothalamus. They send nerve impulses to the posterior pituitary
which in turn releases stored ADH into the blood. The ADH is picked
up by receptors in the cells of the collecting duct and increases the
permeability of the tubules to water. Water leaves the filtrate in the
tubules and passes into the blood in the surrounding capillary network.
A small volume of concentrated urine is produced (Figure 3).
An excess of water
When large amounts of liquid are taken in the blood becomes more
dilute and its water potential becomes less negative. Again, the
change is detected by the osmoreceptors of the hypothalamus. Nerve
impulses to the posterior pituitary are reduced or stopped and so the
release of ADH by the pituitary is inhibited. Very little reabsorption
of water can take place because the walls of the collecting duct
remain impermeable to water. In this way the concentration of
the blood is maintained - and large amounts of dilute urine are
produced (Figure 3).
429
15
HOMEOSTASIS
Bowman's capsule
w
glomeruli
Figure 8 Light micrograph showing a section through a
normal human kidney, 275 magnification
Compare the section of a kidney in Figure 6
with the stylised diagram in Figure 2. How
does the dissection differ from the diagram?
Compare their value in helping to understand the
structure of the organ.
Which micrograph do you find most useful in
developing an understanding of the structure of
the kidney. Why?
Figure 7 Light micrograph of glomeruli in kidney.
These are a tightly coiled network of capillaries
surrounded by the lumen of the Bowman's capsule.
Surrounding this are the tubules (rounded) where
reabsorption takes place, x 230 magnification
The functions of the nephrons
Ultrafiltration
The first stage in the removal of nitrogenous waste and
osmoregulation of the blood is ultrafiltration. Ultrafiltration in
the kidney tubules is a specialised form of the process that results
in the formation of tissue fluid in the capillary beds of the body
and it is the result of the structure of the glomerulus and the cells
lining the Bowman's capsule (Figure 9 and 10). The glomerulus
is supplied with blood by a relatively wide afferent (incoming)
arteriole from the renal artery. The blood leaves through a narrower
efferent (outward) arteriole and as a result there is considerable
pressure in the capillaries of the glomerulus. This forces the blood
out through capillary wall – it acts rather like a sieve. Then the fluid
passes through the basement membrane - scientists are increasingly
recognising the basement membrane as an important factor in
the filtration process. The basement membrane is made up of a
network of collagen fibres and other proteins that make up a second
'sieve'. Most of the plasma contents can pass through the basement
membrane but the blood cells and many proteins are retained in the
capillary because of their size.
Synoptic link
You learnt about collagen and its
properties in Topic 3.7, Types of
proteins.
423
15
15.5 The structure and function of the mammalian kidney
wide
afferent
arteriole
narrow
efferent
arteriole
filtrate in
lumen of
capsule
The wall of the Bowman's capsule also involves special cells
called podocytes that act as an additional filter. They have
extensions called pedicels that wrap around the capillaries,
forming slits that make sure any cells, platelets, or large plasma
proteins that have managed to get through the epithelial cells
and the basement membrane do not get through into the
tubule itself. The filtrate which enters the capsule contains
glucose, salt, urea, and many other substances in the same
concentrations as they are in the blood plasma (Figure 11 and
Table 1). The process is so efficient that up to 20% of the water
and solutes are removed from the plasma as it passes through
the glomerulus. The volume of blood that is filtered through
the kidneys in a given time is known as the glomerular
filtration rate.
layer of
glomerular
capsule cells
capillaries
A Figure 9 Ultrafiltration takes place in the
Bowman's capsule as a result of the high blood
pressure in the glomerulus
capillary
podocyte
UTUOUDU
basement
membrane
podocyte
filtrate in lumen
of capsule
Reabsorption
Ultrafiltration removes urea, the waste product of protein
breakdown, from the blood but it also removes a lot of
water along with the glucose, salt, and other substances
which are present in the plasma. Many of these substances
are needed by the body - for example, glucose is used for
cellular respiration and is never normally excreted. The
ultrafiltrate is also hypotonic to (less concentrated than)
the blood plasma. The main function of the nephron after
the Bowman's capsule is to return most of the filtered
substances back to the blood.
gap in
capillary
endothelium
red blood
JUUUUUU
cell
blood
plasma
podocyte cell of Bowman's capsule wall
A Figure 10 The microstructure of the cells in the
capillaries of the glomerulus and the podocytes of the
Bowman's capsule is important in the ultrafiltration of
the blood
The proximal convoluted tubule
In the proximal convoluted tubule all of the glucose,
amino acids, vitamins, and hormones are moved from the
filtrate back into the blood by active transport. Around
85% of the sodium chloride and water is reabsorbed as
well - the sodium ions are moved by active transport
while the chloride ions and water follow passively down
concentration gradients. The cells lining the proximal
convoluted tubule have clear adaptations:
Table 1 Comparison of the mean
composition of human blood plasma and
the ultrafiltrate as it enters the nephron
Molecule or
ion
Approximate
concentration/
they are covered with microvilli, greatly increasing the surface
area over which substances can be reabsorbed
they have many mitochondria to provide the ATP needed in active
transport systems.
gdm-3
plasma
filtrate
water
900.0
900.0
protein
80.0
0.0
glucose
1.0
1.0
Once the substances have been removed from the nephron, they
diffuse into the extensive capillary network which surrounds the
tubules down steep concentration gradients. These are maintained
by the constant flow of blood through the capillaries. The filtrate
reaching the loop of Henle at the end of the proximal convoluted
tubule is isotonic (at same concentration) with the tissue fluid
surrounding the tubule and isotonic with the blood. At this stage
over 80% of the glomerular filtrate has been reabsorbed back into
the blood. This remains the same regardless of the conditions in
the body.
amino acids
0.5
0.5
urea
0.3
0.3
inorganic ions
7.2
7.2
424
15
15.6 The kidney and osmoregulation
T
ADH, water balance, and blood pressure
The osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus are not the only sensory receptors that
exert control over the release of ADH. It is also stimulated or inhibited by changes
in the blood pressure, detected by baroreceptors in the aortic and carotid
arteries. These baroreceptors are also involved in the control of the heart rate.
A rise in blood pressure can often be caused by a rise in blood volume. The
increase in pressure is detected by the baroreceptors and in turn they
prevent the release of ADH. This increases the volume of water lost in the
urine, reducing the blood volume and so the blood pressure falls.
If the blood pressure falls it can be a signal that the blood volume has fallen.
If the baroreceptors detect a fall in blood pressure there is an increase in the
release of ADH from the pituitary, so the kidneys respond to reduce water
loss from the body. Water is returned to the blood and a small amount of
concentrated urine is produced.
People with severe diarrhoea or more than 20% blood loss often produce
little or no urine. In each case explain why.
Summary questions
1 In cool weather you may produce more urine than on a similar day in hot
weather. Suggest a reason for this.
(2 marks)
2 Draw a diagram or a flow chart to explain how ADH increases the
permeability of the cells lining the distal convoluted tubules and the
collecting duct to water.
(6 marks)
3 There is a rare condition called diabetes insipidus where the body does
not make ADH (or very rarely, the kidneys do not respond to ADH).
a What would you expect the symptoms of diabetes insipidus to be?
(4 marks)
b Explain what is happening in the kidney tubules in a patient
with diabetes insipidus.
(6 marks)
c Suggest how you might treat mild diabetes insipidus (when
some ADH is made) and severe diabetes insipidus (where no
ADH is made).
(3 marks)
430
15
15.8 kidney failure
renal vein -
- renal artery
>old kidneys usually
left in the body
new kidney
usually placed in
the groin and
attached to the
blood vessels
and the bladder
-
bladder
ureter carries -
urine from new
kidney to the
bladder
Figure 3 A donor kidney takes over the functions of the failed kidneys, which are
usually left in the body
There are a number of ways of reducing the risk of rejection. The match
between the antigens of the donor and the recipient is made as close as
possible. For example, a donor kidney can be used with a 'tissue type'
very similar to the recipient (from people with the same blood group).
The recipient is given drugs to suppress their immune response
(immunosuppressant drugs) for the rest of their lives. This helps to
prevent the rejection of their new organ. Immunosuppressant drugs
are improving all the time and the need for a really close tissue match
is becoming less important.
The disadvantage of taking immunosuppressant drugs is that they
prevent the patients from responding effectively to infectious diseases.
They have to take great care if they become ill in any way. However,
most people feel this is a small price to pay for a new, functioning kidney.
Transplanted organs don't last forever with the average transplanted
kidney functioning for around 9-10 years, although some have continued
working for around 50 years. Once the organ starts to fail the patient has
to return to dialysis and wait until another suitable kidney is found.
Synoptic link
Dialysis or transplant?
Dialysis is much more readily available than donor organs, so it is
there whenever kidneys fail. It enables the patient to lead a relatively
normal life. However, patients have to monitor their diet carefully
and need regular sessions on the machine. Long-term dialysis is much
more expensive than a transplant and can eventually cause damage to
the body.
You learnt about stem cells in Topic
6.5, Stem cells.
If a patient receives a kidney transplant they are free from the restrictions
which come with regular dialysis sessions and dietary monitoring. This is
generally the ideal scenario for patients waiting for a transplant.
436
15
15.3 Thermoregulation in endotherms
Controlling thermoregulation
The physiological responses of endotherms to changes in the core
temperature are the result of complex homeostatic mechanisms
involving negative feedback control from the hypothalamus. There are
two control centres:
The heat loss centre
This is activated when the temperature of the blood flowing through
the hypothalamus increases. It sends impulses through autonomic
motor neurones to effectors in the skin and muscles, triggering
responses that act to lower the core temperature.
The heat gain centre
This is activated when the temperature of the blood flowing through
the hypothalamus decreases. It sends impulses through the autonomic
nervous system to effectors in the skin and the muscles, triggering
responses that act to raise the core temperature.
Summary questions
1 Why is the control of the
internal temperature so
important to both ectotherms
and endotherms? (6 marks)
The interaction of the sensory receptors, the autonomic nervous
system, and the effectors in a sophisticated feedback system enables
endotherms to maintain a very stable core body temperature
regardless of environmental conditions or activity levels.
normal blood
temperature
2 Explain how the role of
evaporation of water in
thermoregulation differs
between ectotherms and
endotherms. (6 marks)
cold receptors
in skin
warm receptors
in skin
decrease
increase
3 Explain the difference in
the role of the peripheral
temperature receptors and
the temperature receptors
in the hypothalamus in the
regulation of the core body
temperature in an endotherm.
(3 marks)
feedback
feedback
hypothalamus
heat gain
heat loss
centre
centre
Endotherms that live in very
hot climates are often pale
coloured.
a Why is this? (3 marks)
b Why might you expect
endotherms that live in very
cold environments to be
dark coloured? (2 marks)
c In fact, very few
endotherms that live in very
cold environments are dark
coloured. Suggest reasons
for this. (4 marks)
Vasoconstriction of
superficial arterioles
Onset of shivering
Hair raised by contraction
of hair erector muscles
Increased metabolic rate
Vasodilation of superficial
arterioles
Onset of sweating
Hair lowered as hair
erector muscles relax
Decreased metabolic rate
A Figure 6 Summary of the control of body temperature by the peripheral
temperature receptors, the hypothalamus, and the autonomic nervous system
414
15
15.5 The structure and function of the mammalian kidney
of ions that is essential for the kidney to produce urine that
is more concentrated than the blood. This is a key part of the
countercurrent multiplier system.
By the time the dilute fluid reaches the top of the ascending limb it is
hypotonic to the blood again, and it then enters the distal convoluted
tubule and collecting duct.
Distal convoluted tubule
Balancing the water needs of the body takes place in the distal
convoluted tubule and the collecting duct. These are the areas where
the permeability of the walls of the tubules varies with the levels of
ADH. The cells lining the distal convoluted tubule also have many
mitochondria so they are adapted to carry out active transport.
If the body lacks salt, sodium ions will be actively pumped out of
the distal convoluted tubule with chloride ions following down an
electrochemical gradient. Water can also leave the distal tubule,
concentrating the urine, if the walls of the tubule are permeable in
response to ADH. The distal convoluted tubule also plays a role in
balancing the pH of the blood.
Study tip
The collecting duct
The collecting duct passes down through the concentrated tissue fluid
of the renal medulla (Figure 3 and 6). This is the main site where the
concentration and volume of the urine produced is determined. Water
moves out of the collecting duct by diffusion down a concentration
gradient as it passes through the renal medulla. As a result the
urine becomes more concentrated. The level of sodium ions in the
surrounding fluid increases through the medulla from the cortex to
the pelvis. This means water can be removed from the collecting duct
all the way along its length, producing very hypertonic urine when
the body needs to conserve water. The permeability of the collecting
duct to water is controlled by the level of ADH, which determines how
much or little water is reabsorbed. You will learn more about the role
of the collecting duct in maintaining the water potential of the blood
in Topic 15.6, The kidney and osmoregulation.
Remember that the amount of
reabsorption that occurs in the
proximal tubule is always the
same, the fine-tuning of the
water balance takes place further
along the nephron.
How long is your loop of Henle?
The ability of animals to produce very concentrated urine depends on
several factors, one is the length of the loop of Henle. As you have seen
the loop of Henle develops the concentration gradient across the kidney
medulla, meaning water can leave the collecting duct all the way through,
concentrating the urine as it goes. Fish have no loop of Henle and cannot
produce urine that is more concentrated than their blood. Desert animals
tend to have lots of nephrons that have very long loops of Henle that travel
deep into the medulla.
426
15
HOMEOSTASIS
The loop of Henle
Synoptic link
The loop of Henle is the section of the kidney tubule that enables
mammals to produce urine more concentrated than their own
You learnt about the process of active
blood. Different areas of the loop have different permeabilities to
transport in Topic 5.4, Active transport.
water and this is central to the way the loop of Henle functions.
It acts as a countercurrent multiplier, using energy to produce reabsorption of useful materials by
active transport and diffusion
concentration gradients that result in the movement of
substances such as water from one area to another. Cells use
ATP to transport ions using active transport and this produces
microvilli
a diffusion gradient in the medulla.
EWKI
mitochondrion
The changes that take place in the descending limb of the loop
of Henle depend on the high concentrations of sodium and
chloride ions in the tissue fluid of the medulla that are the
result of events in the ascending limb of the loop.
UULI
basement membrane
lumen of blood capillary
- endothelial cell
Figure 11 The cells of the proximal convoluted
tubule show a high level of adaptation to their function
cortex
glomerulus
proximal
convoluted
tubule
(descending
limb)
distal
convoluted
tubule
(ascending
limb)
blood
B
collecting
The descending limb leads from the proximal convoluted
tubule. This is the region where water moves out of
the filtrate down a concentration gradient. The upper
part is impermeable to water but the lower part of the
descending limb is permeable to water and runs down
into the medulla. The concentration of sodium and
chloride ions in the tissue fluid of the medulla gets
higher and higher moving through from the cortex to the
pyramids, as a result of the activity of the ascending limb
of the loop of Henle.
The filtrate entering the descending limb of the loop of
Henle is isotonic with the blood. As it travels down the
limb, water passes out of the loop into the tissue fluid by
osmosis down a concentration gradient. It then moves
down a concentration gradient into the blood of the
surrounding capillaries (the vasa recta).
The descending limb is not permeable to sodium and
chloride ions, and no active transport takes place in
the descending limb. The fluid that reaches the hairpin
bend is very concentrated and hypertonic to the blood
in the capillaries.
The first section of the ascending limb of the loop of
Henle is very permeable to sodium and chloride ions
and they move out of the concentrated solution by
diffusion down a concentration gradient. In the second
section of the ascending limb, sodium and chloride ions
are actively pumped out into the medulla tissue fluid
against a concentration gradient. This produces very high
sodium and chloride ion concentrations in the medulla
tissue. Importantly, the ascending limb of the loop of
Henle is impermeable to water, so water cannot follow
the chloride and sodium ions down a concentration
gradient. This means the fluid left in the ascending
limb becomes increasingly dilute, while the tissue fluid
of the medulla develops the very high concentration
Naci
H20
300
H204+
duct
Naci
400
300
H20
H20
water drawn
out of
collecting duct
by osmosis
NaCl
sodium and
chloride ions
pumped out
of ascending
limb
water moves
back into
capillary
network
600
500
H20
H20
– Naci
800
700
H20 =
NaCl
H204
1000
900
H2O
1200
medulla
urine
A Figure 12 The countercurrent multiplier system
of the loop of Henle depends on a combination of
active transport, diffusion, and osmosis. The higher
the number the lower the water potential
425
15
HOMEOSTASIS
ST shivering thermogenesis
NST non-shivering thermogenesis
BMR basal metabolic rate
------
NST
metabolic rate
Suggest and explain two differences in
the composition of urine of a person with
nephritis when compared to the urine of
a person with healthy kidneys. (4 marks)
Caffeine is a mild diuretic. Caffeine prevents
the introduction of additional aquaporins
into the wall of the collecting duct of the
nephron and therefore additional water is
not removed from the urine.
Aquaporins are channels in the cell
surface membrane that allow water
molecules to pass through.
The diagram represents an aquaporin.
water molecule
cold
warm
BMR
cell surface
membrane
OOO
cell surface
membrane
ambient temperature
a Describe the change in metabolic rate
shown in the graph.
(3 marks)
b State which part of the involuntary
nervous system stimulates thermogenesis.
(1 mark)
Explain why an increased metabolic
rate leads to an increase in the body
temperature.
(3 marks)
d Explain the change in metabolic rate as
the external temperature increases.
(3 marks)
Recent research has shown that the metabolic
activity associated NST occurs mainly in a
specialised type of fat tissue called brown
adipose tissue (BAT).
A typical brown adipose cell and white
adipose cell are shown in the diagram.
brown adipose cell white adipose cell
(i) Identify the type of molecule labelled T
(1 mark)
(ii) The aquaporin allows water to travel
from the collecting duct into the
surrounding tissues but prevents the
passage of ions such as sodium ions
and potassium ions.
With reference to the diagram,
suggest two ways in which the
structure of this aquaporin prevents
the passage of ions.
(2 marks)
OCR F214 2010 (apart from a and b)
The graph shows the metabolic rate changes
as ambient temperature (temperature of the
surroundings) changes.
e
4
f
Non-shivering thermogenesis is stimulated by
cold temperatures and leads to an increase in
metabolic activity that is not associated with
muscle contraction. The increased metabolic
activity results in the production of heat.
(i) Describe the visible differences between
the two cells in the diagrams. (3 marks)
(ii) Suggest how the brown adipose cell
is better adapted for the increased
heating of the body. (3 marks)
The mitochondria in brown adipose cells
contain a protein called uncoupling protein
1 (UCP1) that inhibits the synthesis of ATP.
Explain how this would result in
increased warming OR a greater
temperature rise.
(2 marks)
439
15
HOMEOSTASIS
skin surface
Vasoconstriction
The arterioles near the surface of the skin constrict. The arteriovenous
shunt vessels dilate, so very little blood flows through the capillary
networks close to the surface of the skin. The skin looks pale, and
very little radiation takes place. The warm blood is kept well below
the surface.
Little heat
radiated
capillaries
empty of
blood
shunt
> Vessel
dilated
arteriole
constricted
ADNA
<venule
Decreased sweating
As the core temperature falls, rates of sweating decrease and sweat
production will stop entirely. This greatly reduces cooling by the
evaporation of water from the surface of the skin, although some
evaporation from the lungs still continues.
7 fat
- tissue
blood
artery
vein
Figure 4 Vasoconstriction reduces
heat loss by radiation
Raising the body hair or feathers
As the body temperature falls, the erector pili muscles in the skin
contract, pulling the hair or feathers of the animal erect. This traps an
insulating layer of air and so reduces cooling through the skin. The
effect can be quite dramatic and it is a very effective way to reduce
heat loss to the environment in many animals. In humans this has
little effect although you can observe the hairs being pulled upright.
Shivering
As the core temperature falls the body may begin to shiver. This is
the rapid, involuntary contracting and relaxing of the large voluntary
muscles in the body. The metabolic heat from the exothermic reactions
warm up the body instead of moving it and is an effective way of
raising the core temperature.
Endotherms living in cold climates often have additional anatomical
adaptations to help them keep warm. Many have adaptations that
minimise their SA:V ratio to reduce cooling (e.g., small ears). Another
common adaptation is a thick layer of insulating fat underneath
the skin, for example, blubber in whales and seals. Some animals
hibernate – they build up fat stores, build a well-insulated shelter, and
lower their metabolic rate so they pass the worst of the cold weather
in a deep sleep-like state.
Figure 5 The effect of the contraction
of the erector pili muscles in robins
Polar bears demonstrate many of the ways in which endotherms can
survive in extremely cold conditions. They have small ears and fur
on their feet to insulate them from the ice. The fur and skin of polar
bears work together. The hairs are hollow so trap a permanent layer
of insulating air. The skin underneath is black, so it absorbs warming
radiation. They have a thick layer of fat under the skin. Polar bears
are so well insulated that their external surfaces are similar in
temperature to the snow and ice on which they live. Females dig
dens in the snow and remain in them, warm and insulated, for
months while they give birth to their cubs, only emerging when the
cubs are large enough to survive the cold. Polar bears are so well
adapted to life in temperatures down to -50°C in the Arctic that
they can overheat at temperatures over 10°C.
413
15
HOMEOSTASIS
Table 2 Urine concentrations and urine/plasma ratios in mammal species
from different habitats
Mammal
rat
kangaroo rat
beaver
human
porpoise
camel
Urine concentration/mOsmol 1-1
2900
5500
520
1400
1800
2800
Urine : plasma ratio
9
16
1.7
4-5
8
1 Demonstrate how this data could be presented in a different way.
2 How would you expect the loops of Henle of a camel to compare
with those of a beaver? Explain your answer.
3 Why do you think a porpoise has a similar urine: plasma ratio as a
human being?
The kangaroo rat has long loops of Henle but they are not
comparatively as long as some animals such as the camel. The
cells lining the loops in the kangaroo rat, however, have a very large
number of mitochondria that have a very large number of cristae.
Suggest why these observations are important in the development
of the urine: plasma ratio seen in the kangaroo rat.
Summary questions
1 Give three examples of how the kidneys are well
adapted for their functions in the body
(excluding cellular adaptations).
16.
2 a How much blood is filtered over 24 hours through
the kidneys?
(1 mark)
b What percentage of this filtrate is lost to the body
as urine?
(4 marks)
3 a What is ultrafiltration?
(4 marks)
b What would you expect to see in normal glomerular
filtrate?
(4 marks)
c Kidney infections can damage the lining of the
Bowman's capsule. How might this result in protein
appearing in the urine?
(6 marks)
4 The normal concentration of urea in the blood is
around 2.5-7.1 mmol/litre of blood. The concentration
of urea in the urine varies considerably but most
people pass 0.43-0.72 moles of urea in the urine over
24 hours.
a Calculate the mean concentration of urea in the
urine over a 24-hour period.
b Approximately how much more urea is there in
urine than in blood?
ci Suggest three possible factors that might affect
the amount of urea in the urine. (3 marks)
ii Why do these factors not affect the
concentration of urea in the blood ? (1 mark)
5 Explain the main stages of how the kidney tubules
produce urine that is more concentrated than the
blood in these different regions
a The proximal tubule
(4 marks)
b The descending limb of the loop of Henle (5 marks)
c The ascending limb of the loop of Henle (5 marks)
d The distal convoluted tubule
(6 marks)
e The collecting duct.
(6 marks)
427
15.6 The kidney and osmoregulation
Specification reference: 5.1.2
The mammalian kidney has a vital excretory function - it removes urea,
Learning outcomes
the nitrogenous waste product of metabolism from the body. The kidney,
Demonstrate knowledge,
however, also plays another important homeostatic role in the body – it
understanding, and application of:
is the main organ of osmoregulation. This involves controlling the water
potential of the blood within very narrow boundaries, regardless of the
→ The control of the water
activities of the body. Eating a salty meal, drinking large volumes of
potential of the blood.
liquid, exercising hard, running a fever, or visiting a very hot climate can
all put osmotic stresses on the body. It is very important to keep the water
Synoptic link
potential of the tissue fluid as stable as possible, because if water moves
into or out of the cells by osmosis it can cause damage and even death.
You learnt about water potential
and the effect of osmosis on cells
Osmoregulation
in Topic 5.5, Osmosis.
Every day the body has to deal with many unpredictable events. The
water potential of the blood has to be maintained regardless of the
water and solutes taken in as you eat and drink, and the water and
water gains
water losses mineral salts lost by sweating, in defaecation, and in the
respiration in
exhaled air faeces urine. Changing the concentration of the urine is crucial in
cells 350 cm3
400 cm3 100 cm3
this dynamic equilibrium. The amount of water lost in the
food
800 cm3
urine is controlled by ADH in a negative feedback system.
ADH is produced by the hypothalamus and secreted into
the posterior pituitary gland, where it is stored. ADH
sweat +
600 cm3
increases the permeability of the distal convoluted tubule
and, most importantly, the collecting duct to water.
drink
1450 cm3
urine 1500 cm3
You will be concentrating on the effect of ADH on the
collecting duct walls.
Figure 1 Typical water gains and losses over a
24-hour period in an adult human being
The mechanism of ADH action
ADH is released from the pituitary gland and carried in the blood to the
cells of the collecting duct where it has its effect. The hormone does not
cross the membrane of the tubule cells - it binds to receptors on the
cell membrane and triggers the formation of cyclic AMP (CAMP) as a
second messenger inside the cell. A second messenger
is a molecule which relays signals received at cell
hypothalamus
surface receptors to molecules inside the cell. The
osmoreceptors
CAMP causes a cascade of events:
ADH made
in hypothalamus
ADH released from
Vesicles in the cells lining the collecting duct fuse
posterior pituitary into
blood when osmoreceptors with the cell surface membranes on the side of the
detect changes in water
cell in contact with the tissue fluid of the medulla.
potential of blood
posterior
The membranes of these vesicles contain protein-
pituitary
based water channels (aquaporins) and when they
anterior
pituitary
ADH stored in
are inserted into the cell surface membrane, they
posterior pituitary
make it permeable to water.
A Figure 2 ADH is made in the hypothalamus but stored
This provides a route for water to move out of the
and released from the posterior pituitary gland when it is
tubule cells into the tissue fluid of the medulla
stimulated by neurones from the osmoreceptors in the
and the blood capillaries by osmosis.
hypothalamus
428
15.3 Thermoregulation in endotherms
Specification reference: 5.1.1
Endotherms can regulate their body temperature within a very narrow
range in a wide variety of external conditions. Human beings, like all
mammals, have a number of physiological responses that make this
thermoregulation possible.
Lea utcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the physiological and
behavioural responses
involved in temperature
control in endotherms.
.
Detecting temperature changes
In any homeostatic system receptors are needed to detect a change
in the internal environment. The peripheral temperature receptors
are in the skin and detect changes in the surface temperature.
Temperature receptors in the hypothalamus detect the temperature
of the blood deep in the body. The temperature of the skin is
much more likely to be affected by external conditions than the
temperature of the hypothalamus. The combination of the two
gives the body great sensitivity and allows it to respond not only
to actual changes in the temperature of the blood but to pre-empt
possible problems that might result from changes in the external
environment.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the areas of the
brain in Topic 13.7, Structure and
function of the brain.
The temperature receptors in the hypothalamus act as the thermostat
of the body, controlling the responses that maintain the core
temperature in a dynamic equilibrium to within about 1 °C of 37°C.
Principles of thermoregulation in endotherms
Endotherms use their internal exothermic metabolic activities to
keep them warm, and energy-requiring physiological responses to
help them cool down. They also have passive ways of heating up
and cooling down, to reduce the energy demands on their bodies.
Like ectotherms, endotherms have a range of behavioural responses
to temperature changes that include basking in the Sun, pressing
themselves to warm surfaces, wallowing in water and mud to cool
down, and digging burrows to keep warm or cool. Some animals
even become dormant through the coldest weather (hibernation) or
through the hottest weather (aestivation is a period of prolonged or
deep sleep similar to hibernation but occurs in summer or during dry
seasons to avoid heat stress rather than cold).
Figure 1 Thermoregulation makes
it possible for endotherms to survive in
many extreme environments
Humans have additional behavioural adaptations to help control
body temperature - clothes are worn to stay warm, houses are
built, and then heated up or cooled down to maintain the ideal
temperature.
In spite of these behavioural responses, endotherms mainly rely on
physiological adaptations to maintain a stable core body temperature,
regardless of the environmental conditions or the amount of exercise
being done. These adaptations include the peripheral temperature
receptors, the thermoregulatory centres of the hypothalamus, the skin,
and muscles.
411
15
HOMEOSTASIS
transamination - the conversion of one amino acid into
another. This is important because the diet does not
always contain the required balance of amino acids
but transamination can overcome the problems this
might cause.
amino acid pool
for building
new proteins
amino acids
absorbed
from ileum
amino group combines
with carbon dioxide
to form urea
kidneys
to be
excreted
excess amino
acids to
liver
amino
acid
molecules
split
The most important role of the liver in protein
metabolism is in deamination - the removal of an
amine group from a molecule. The body cannot store
either proteins or amino acids. Any excess ingested
protein would be excreted and therefore wasted if
it were not for the action of the hepatocytes. They
deaminate the amino acids, removing the amino
group, and converting it first into ammonia which
is very toxic and then to urea. Urea is toxic in high
concentrations but not in the concentrations normally
found in the blood. Urea is excreted by the kidneys
(you will learn about the role of the kidneys in
excretion and water balance in Topics 15.5 and 15.6).
The remainder of the amino acid can then be fed
into cellular respiration or converted into lipids
for storage.
rest of molecule
used in respiration
Figure 2 The process of deamination
to
respiration
deamination
of excess
amino acids
The ammonia produced in the deamination of proteins
is converted into urea in a set of enzyme-controlled
reactions known as the ornithine cycle. Removing
the amino group from amino acids and converting
the highly toxic ammonia to the less toxic and more
manageable compound urea involves some complex
biochemistry. This is simplified and summarised in
Figure 3.
ammonia
-NH3
NH3
ornithine
urea
NH3
Detoxification
CO2
The level of toxins in the body always tends to
citruline
arginine
increase. Apart from urea, many other metabolic
pathways produce potentially poisonous substances.
We also take in a wide variety of toxins by choice such
as alcohol and other drugs. The liver is the site where
most of these substances are detoxified and made
harmless.
H20
One example is the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide,
Figure 3 The ornithine cycle where ammonia resulting
a by-product of various metabolic pathways in the
from the breakdown of excess amino acids in the body is
body. Hepatocytes contain the enzyme catalase, one
converted into useful products and urea
of the most active known enzymes, that splits the
hydrogen peroxide into oxygen and water. Another
example is the way in which liver detoxifies the ethanol – the active Synoptic link
drug in alcoholic drinks. Hepatocytes contain the enzyme alcohol
dehydrogenase that breaks down the ethanol to ethanal. Ethanal is then
You learnt about catalase as an
enzyme in Topic 3.7, Types of
converted to ethanoate which may be used to build up fatty acids or
used in cellular respiration.
proteins and Topic 4.2, Factors
affecting enzyme activity.
417
15
15.4 Excretion, homeostasis, and the liver
Looking at liver cells ?
When liver tissue is stained for use under the light microscope, different
stains can be used to show up different things, for example glycogen stored
in the hepatocytes.
Using low magnification with a light microscope enables you to see the
arrangement of the liver cells, the blood vessels, and the sinusoids.
central vein
and lobule
liver cells
sinusoids <3
Figure 4 Light micrograph through a section of human
liver x34 magnification
Using a high magnification gives more detail of the individual hepatocytes.
hepatocyte
red blood cells
within sinusoids
mitochondria
Kupffer cells
A Figure 5 High magnification light micrograph of liver cells ~3500 magnification
Synoptic link
You learnt about the light
microscope in Topic 2.1,
Microscopy.
Make a scientific drawing of some of the cells seen in Figure 5. Annotate
your drawings to indicate the role of the cells in the liver.
418
15
15.3 Thermoregulation in endotherms
high level of
radiation
capillaries
full of
blood
Cooling down
If the core body temperature increases it is important for an animal to
cool down. There are a number of rapid responses to a rise in the core
temperature that are common to all endotherms. These include:
shunt vessel
constricted
venule
arteriole
dilated
blood
Vasodilation
The arterioles near the surface of the skin dilate when the
temperature rises. The vessels that provide a direct connection
between the arterioles and the venules (the arteriovenous shunt
vessels) constrict. This forces blood through the capillary networks
close to the surface of the skin. The skin flushes, and cools as a result
of increased radiation. If the skin is pressed against cool surfaces, then
the cooling results from conduction.
artery
vein
connecting vessel
constricted
Figure 2 Vasodilation leading to heat
loss by radiation
Increased sweating
As the core temperature starts to increase, rates of sweating also
increase. Sweat spreads out across the surface of the skin. In some
mammals, including humans and horses, there are sweat glands all
over the body. As the sweat evaporates from the surface of the skin,
heat is lost, cooling the blood below the surface. In some animals,
the sweat glands are restricted to the less hairy areas of the body
such as the paws. These animals often open their mouths and pant
when they get hot, again losing heat as the water evaporates. In
human beings, around 1 dm of sweat is lost by evaporation on a
normal day. If the conditions are very hot and dry or the person
is exercising very hard, up to 12 dm of sweat a day can be lost.
Kangaroos and cats often lick their front legs to keep cool in high
temperatures.
Figure 3 Horses sweat all over
when they are very hot. This horse
is also panting, so he is cooling by
evaporation both from his skin and his
breathing passages. The hair on his body
is also lying very flat to avoid trapping
an insulating layer of air. The dilated
arterioles and venules under the skin take
blood to and from the capillary network
Reducing the insulating effect of hair or feathers
As the body temperature begins to increase, the erector pili muscles
(the hair erector muscles) in the skin relax - as a result, the hair or
feathers of the animal lie flat to the skin. This avoids trapping an
insulating layer of air. It has little effect in humans.
Endotherms that live in hot climates often have anatomical
adaptations as well as the behavioural and physiological adaptations
already described. These minimise the effect of high temperatures and
maximise the ability of the animal to cool down through the surface
area of the body. They include a relatively large surface area: volume
(SA:V) ratio to maximise cooling (e.g., include large ears and wrinkly
skin), and pale fur or feathers to reflect radiation.
Synoptic link
You learnt about surface area:
volume ratio in Topic 7.1,
Specialised exchange surfaces.
Warming up
If the core temperature falls it is important for an animal to warm up
and prevent further cooling. There are a number of rapid responses to
a fall in the core temperature that are common to all endotherms.
412
15
15.4 Excretion, homeostasis, and the liver
Synoptic link
You learnt about macrophages in
Topic 12.5, Non-specific animal
defences against pathogens.
mixing increases the oxygen content of the blood from the hepatic
portal vein, supplying the hepatocytes with enough oxygen for their
needs. The sinusoids contain Kupffer cells, which act as the resident
macrophages of the liver, ingesting foreign particles and helping
to protect against disease. The hepatocytes secrete bile from the
breakdown of the blood into spaces called canaliculi, and from these
the bile drains into the bile ductules which take it to the gall bladder.
bile canaliculus-the hepatocytes secrete bile into
these canaliculi and from there it drains into the gall
bladder to be stored
inferior vena cava
hepatic vein
gall bladder
venule from amontoand blood from the
hepatic portal
two sources mixes
vein
Coopood
in the sinusoids
Kuppfer cells
liver
liver
hepatic portal vein
splenic vein
spleen
stomach
pancreas
Laddappadlo
arteriole from
hepatic artery Domodo
hepatocyte
venule of hepatic
vein carries
blood away
hepatic
artery
w
aorta
mesenteric
vein
small
intestine
C The arrangement of the tissues in the liver,
giving all of the hepatocytes close contact with
the blood for both removing materials and
adding substances.
colon and
rectum
a The position of the liver
in the body
b The blood supply
to the liver
nucleus
golgi apparatus
- mitochondria
d Single hepatocyte
A Figure 1 The structure of the liver is related to its variety of functions in the
metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats and in excretion and homeostasis
The functions of the liver
The liver has many functions – around 500 different metabolic
pathways are linked to the liver. Several of these play a major role in
homeostasis. These functions will now be explored in more detail.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the interconversion
of glucose to glycogen and the
storage of glycogen in the liver
in Topic 14.3, Regulation of blood
glucose concentration.
Carbohydrate metabolism
Hepatocytes are closely involved in the homeostatic control of glucose
levels in the blood by their interaction with insulin and glucagon.
When blood glucose levels rise, insulin levels rise and stimulate
hepatocytes to convert glucose to the storage carbohydrate glycogen.
About 100g of glycogen is stored in the liver. Similarly, when blood
sugar levels start to fall, the hepatocytes convert the glycogen back to
glucose under the influence of the hormone glucagon.
Deamination of excess amino acids
The liver plays a vital role in protein metabolism where hepatocytes
synthesise most of the plasma proteins. Hepatocytes also carry out
416
15
15.2 Thermoregulation in ectotherms
as well. Dark colours absorb more radiation than light colours.
Lizards living in colder climates tend to be darker coloured than
lizards living in hotter countries so that they get warmer. Some
ectotherms also alter their heart rate to increase or decrease the
metabolic rate and sometimes to affect the warming or cooling across
the body surfaces.
Summary questions
1 a What is an ectotherm?
(2 marks)
b Give two examples of
ectotherms. (1 mark)
Ectotherms are always more vulnerable to fluctuations in the
environment than endotherms. However, by using a variety of
behavioural and physiological strategies many of them can maintain
relatively stable core temperatures. They need less food than
endotherms as they use less energy regulating their temperatures, and
so they can survive in some very difficult habitats where food is in
short supply.
2 Give an example of an
ectotherm warming up
or cooling down through
interaction with the
environment by:
a radiation (2 marks)
b conduction (2 marks)
c convection (2 marks)
d evaporation. (2 marks)
The Namaqua chameleon - a highly adapted
ectotherm
The Namaqua chameleon lives in the Namib desert, one of the most
inhospitable hot and waterless environments on Earth. Several observations
have been made on this rare and extremely well-adapted ectotherm:
• It is black in the morning. It may even appear black on the side exposed
to the sun and pale grey on the other side of the body.
It orientates its body sideways to the Sun.
It has an increased heart rate early in the morning when basking.
It inflates its body in the early morning.
It presses its body to the desert sand in the morning.
During the day the chameleon deflates its body.
The animal becomes a very pale grey.
It holds itself well away from the desert surface.
The heart rate slows down.
• The chameleon opens its mouth and pants in the middle of the day.
3 Galapagos marine iguanas are
unique reptiles because they
swim and feed in the sea. Read
the following statements and
discuss the observations in
terms of thermoregulation.
a Marine iguanas are black in
colour. They spend a lot of
time on the exposed rocks
and alter their position
and posture regularly.
They need to have a body
temperature of around 36°C
before they dive for food.
(5 marks)
b Dives usually last a few
minutes but can last up to
30 minutes. The length of
the dive seems to be related
to body size. The core
temperature of the iguanas
can drop by about 10°C
during a dive. The animals
are slow and clumsy when
they emerge from the sea.
(6 marks)
Figure 4 The Namaqua chameleon looks very different depending on
whether it is trying to gain or lose heat
Using each of the adaptations of the Namaqua chameleon described,
explain how they help the animal to warm up or cool down.
410
15
HOMEOSTASIS
body temperature/°C
body temperature regardless of the temperature
of the environment (endotherm literally means
endotherm
'inside heat'). They have adaptations which enable
them to maintain their body temperature and to
take advantage of warmth from the environment.
As a result, endotherms survive in a wide range of
environments. Keeping warm in cold conditions
and cooling down in hot conditions are both active
ectotherm
processes. The metabolic rate of endotherms is around
five times higher than ectotherms, so they need to
consume more food to meet their metabolic needs
than ectotherms of a similar size.
0 10 20 30
external temperature/°C
Temperature regulation in ectotherms A Figure 2 Graph to show simplified effect of changes in the
Ectotherms cannot control their body temperature
internal and external temperature on ectotherms and endotherms
using their metabolism - however, they have evolved a
range of behavioural responses that enable them to overcome
the limitations imposed by the temperature of their surroundings.
Behavioural responses
Ectotherms display a number of behaviours which increase or reduce
the radiation they absorb from the Sun. Sometimes they need to warm
up to reach a temperature at which their metabolic reactions happen
fast enough for them to be active. They may bask in the Sun, orientate
their bodies so that the maximum surface area is exposed to the
Sun, and even extend areas of their body to increase the surface area
exposed to the Sun. For example, lizards often bask for long periods of
time to get warm enough to move fast and hunt their prey, and insects
such as locusts and butterflies orientate themselves for maximum
exposure to the Sun and spread their wings to increase the available
surface area to get warm enough to fly.
Ectotherms can increase their body temperature through conduction by
pressing their bodies against the warm ground. They also get warmer
as a result of exothermic metabolic reactions. Galapagos iguanas will
contract their muscles and vibrate increasing cellular metabolism to
raise their body temperature. Similarly, moths and butterflies may
vibrate their wings to warm their muscles before they take flight.
Ectotherms sometimes need to cool down to prevent their core
temperature reaching a point where enzymes begin to denature. To
cool down, many of the warming processes are reversed. Ectotherms
shelter from the sun by seeking shade, hiding in cracks in rocks, or
even digging burrows. They will press their bodies against cool, shady
earth or stones, or move into available water or mud. They orientate
their bodies so that the minimum surface area is exposed to the sun,
and minimise their movements to reduce the metabolic heat generated.
Physiological responses to warming
Much of the thermoregulation by ectotherms is the result of
behavioural responses but some of them have physiological responses
Figure 3 The black pigment of the
marine iguanas observed by Darwin on
the Galapagos Islands enables them to
absorb enough heat to swim and feed in
the relatively cold seawater surrounding
the famous archipelago
409
15.4 Excretion, homeostasis,
and the liver
Specification reference: 5.1.2
Many of the chemical reactions of metabolism that take place in the
cells of the body produce waste products that are toxic if they are
allowed to build up. Excretion is the removal of the waste products of
metabolism from the body.
Excretion in mammals
The main metabolic waste products in mammals are:
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the term excretion and its
importance in maintaining
metabolism and homeostasis
→ the structure and mechanisms
of action and functions of the
mammalian liver
► the examination and drawing
of stained sections to show
the histology of liver tissue.
Carbon dioxide - one of the waste products of cellular respiration
which is excreted from the lungs.
Bile pigments – formed from the breakdown of haemoglobin from
old red blood cells in the liver. They are excreted in the bile from
the liver into the small intestine via the gall bladder and bile duct.
They colour the faeces.
Nitrogenous waste products (urea) - formed from the breakdown of
excess amino acids by the liver. All mammals produce urea as their
nitrogenous waste. Fish produce ammonia while birds and insects
produce uric acid. Urea is excreted by the kidneys in the urine.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the excretion of
carbon dioxide from the body in
Topic 7.2, Mammalian gaseous
exchange system and Topic 8.4,
Transport of oxygen and carbon
dioxide in the blood.
The liver
The liver is one of the major body organs involved in homeostasis.
It is a reddish brown organ which makes up about 5% of the total
body mass – the largest internal organ of the body. It lies just below
the diaphragm and is made up of several lobes. The liver is very fast
growing and damaged areas generally regenerate very quickly.
The liver has a very rich blood supply - about 1 dm of blood flows
through it every minute. Oxygenated blood is supplied to the liver by the
hepatic artery and removed from the liver and returned to the heart in
the hepatic vein. The liver is also supplied with blood by a second vessel,
the hepatic portal vein. This carries blood loaded with the products of
digestion straight from the intestines to the liver and this is the starting
point for many metabolic activities of the liver (Figure 1). Up to 75% of
the blood flowing through the liver comes via the hepatic portal vein.
The structure of the liver
The liver carries out many different complex functions but the cells
are surprisingly simple and uniform in appearance. Liver cells or
hepatocytes have large nuclei, prominent Golgi apparatus, and lots
of mitochondria, indicating that they are metabolically active cells
(Figure 1). They divide and replicate - even if around 65% of the liver
is lost, it will regenerate in a matter of months.
The blood from the hepatic artery and the hepatic portal vein is mixed
in spaces called sinusoids which are surrounded by hepatocytes. This
415
15.8 Kidney failure
Specification reference: 5.1.2
The kidneys play a vital role in homeostasis. If they are damaged and
become less efficient or stop working, the effects on the body are
serious and may be fatal if they are not treated.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the effects of kidney failure
and its potential treatments.
Causes and effects of kidney failure
There are a number of reasons why the kidneys may fail. They
include kidney infections, where the structure of the podocytes and
the tubules themselves may be damaged or destroyed; raised blood
pressure that can damage the structure of the epithelial cells and
basement membrane of the Bowman's capsule; and genetic conditions
such as polycystic kidney disease where the healthy kidney tissue is
replaced by fluid-filled cysts or damaged by pressure from cysts.
If the kidneys are infected or affected by high blood pressure this
may cause:
Protein in the urine - if the basement membrane or podocytes of
the Bowman's capsule are damaged, they no longer act as filters
and large plasma proteins can pass into the filtrate and are passed
out in the urine.
Blood in the urine - another symptom that the filtering process is
no longer working.
If the kidneys fail completely, the concentrations of urea and mineral
ions build up in the body. The effects include:
Loss of electrolyte balance - if the kidneys fail, the body cannot
excrete excess sodium, potassium, and chloride ions. This causes
osmotic imbalances in the tissues and eventual death.
Build-up of toxic urea in the blood - if the kidneys fail, the body
cannot get rid of urea and it can poison the cells.
High blood pressure - the kidneys play an important role in
controlling the blood pressure by maintaining the water balance
of the blood. If the kidneys fail, the blood pressure increases
and this can cause a range of health problems including heart
problems and strokes.
Weakened bones as the calcium/phosphorus balance in the blood
is lost.
Pain and stiffness in joints as abnormal proteins build up in the blood.
Anaemia - the kidneys are involved in the production of a
hormone called erythropoietin that stimulates the formation of red
blood cells. When the kidneys fail it can reduce the production of
red blood cells causing tiredness and lethargy.
Measuring glomerular filtration rate
Kidney problems almost always affect the rate at which blood is
filtered in the Bowman's capsules of the nephrons. The glomerular
433
15
HOMEOSTASIS
Cirrhosis of the liver
Cirrhosis is a disease where the normal liver tissue is replaced by fibrous
scar tissue. There are lots of different causes including genetic conditions
and hepatitis C, however, in the UK the most common cause is drinking
excessive amounts of alcohol.
There are three stages of alcoholic liver disease - alcoholic fatty liver
disease, alcoholic hepatitis, and liver cirrhosis. In fatty liver, big fat-filled
vesicles displace the nuclei of the hepatocytes and the liver gets larger.
In alcoholic hepatitis, the patient has fatty liver along with damaged
hepatocytes and the sinusoids and hepatic veins become narrowed.
In alcoholic cirrhosis the liver tissue is irreversibly damaged. Many
hepatocytes die and are replaced with fibrous tissue. The hepatocytes can
no longer divide and replace themselves so the liver shrinks and its ability to
deal with toxins in the body decreases.
1 In many cases, if an affected person stops drinking alcohol
the liver may recover. How is this possible?
Many people cannot stop drinking - explain why not and
discuss ways of helping those affected.
3 Suggest possible effects on the body when the alcoholic
liver damage becomes irreversible.
4 Discuss the pros and cons of giving someone with alcoholic
cirrhosis of the liver a liver transplant.
Summary questions
1 Many people use the term excretion to describe defecation.
Why is this not entirely accurate?
(6 marks)
2 Hepatocytes make up approximately 70-85% of the liver's mass.
a What is a hepatocyte?
(2 marks)
b Hepatocytes have large nuclei, lots of Golgi apparatus,
and many mitochondria. What does this tell you about
the cells?
(3 marks)
3 a Draw a labelled diagram to show the structure of the liver. (6 marks)
b Explain how the structure of the liver is adapted for its
functions in the body
(6 marks)
(6 marks)
4 a Why do you think the liver is particularly affected by
excess drinking?
b Why is a build-up of fatty tissue a common symptom of
excess drinking?
(4 marks)
419
HOMEOSTASIS
15.1 The principles of homeostasis
Specification reference: 5.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the principles of homeostasis.
The enzyme-controlled reactions of life can only take place if the
conditions are right. The concentration of chemicals such as glucose
and sodium ions must be kept within a narrow range, as must the pH
and water balance of the body fluids, and the core temperature of the
body. Organisms use both chemical and electrical systems to monitor
and respond to any changes from the steady state of the body, and use
the information to maintain a dynamic equilibrium.
Receptors and effectors
It is impossible to maintain a living mammal in a completely stable
state because everything causes minute changes. Instead, the body
maintains a dynamic equilibrium, with small fluctuations over a
narrow range of conditions. This is known as homeostasis.
Receptors and effectors are vital for the body to maintain this dynamic
equilibrium. As you have seen, sensory receptors detect changes in the
internal and external environment of an organism. In homeostasis,
it is essential to monitor changes in the internal environment,
for example, the pH of the blood, core body temperature, and
concentrations of urea and sodium ions in the blood.
Figure 1 Mammals maintain the
conditions inside their body within very
narrow limits wherever they live and
whatever they do
Synoptic link
You learnt about sensory
receptors, sensory and motor
neurones, and coordination in
the brain in Chapter 13, Neuronal
communication.
Information from the sensory receptors is transmitted to the brain and
impulses are sent along the motor neurones to the effectors to bring
about changes to restore the equilibrium in the body. Effectors are
the muscles or glands that react to the motor stimulus to bring about
a change in response to a stimulus. Both are vital in a homeostatic
system - detecting change is no use without the means to react to that
change, but effectors cause chaos unless responding to a need.
Feedback systems
Homeostasis depends on sensory receptors detecting small changes in
the body, and effectors working to restore the status quo. These precise
control mechanisms in the body are based on feedback systems that
enable the maintenance of a relatively steady state around a narrow
range of conditions.
Synoptic link
You learnt about negative
feedback in Chapter 14, Hormonal
communication.
Negative feedback systems
Most of the feedback systems in the body involve negative feedback.
A small change in one direction is detected by sensory receptors. As a
result, effectors work to reverse the change and restore conditions to
their base level. Negative feedback systems work to reverse the initial
stimulus. You have seen negative feedback in action in the control of
blood sugar levels by insulin and glucagon. Negative feedback systems
406
15.5 The structure and function of
the mammalian kidney
Specification reference: 5.1.2
Human kidneys are typical of all mammalian kidneys. They are a pair
of reddish-brown organs attached to the back of the abdominal cavity.
They are usually surrounded by a thick, protective layer of fat and
a layer of fibrous connective tissue. The kidneys play two important
homeostatic roles in the body - they are involved in excretion and
osmoregulation. They filter nitrogenous waste products out of the
blood, especially urea. They also help to maintain the water balance and
pH of the blood, and hence the tissue fluid that surrounds all the cells.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the structure, mechanisms of
action, and functions of the
mammalian kidney
the dissection, examination,
and drawing of the external
and internal structure of the
kidney
the examination and drawing
of stained sections to show
the histology of nephrons.
The anatomy of the kidneys
If you put your hands on your hips, the place where your thumbs are
is the approximate position of your kidneys. The kidneys are supplied
with blood at arterial pressure by the renal arteries that branch off
from the abdominal aorta. Blood that has circulated through the
kidneys is removed by the renal vein that drains into the inferior vena
cava. About 90-120 cm of blood passes through the kidneys every
minute. All of the blood in the body passes through the kidneys about
once an hour. The kidneys filter 180 dm of blood a day, producing
1-2 dm of urine. The final volume depends on many different factors.
You will learn more about the factors that determine the amount of
urine produced in Topic 15.6, The kidney and osmoregulation.
vena cava
aorta
renal artery
renal vein
kidney
ureter
The kidneys are made up of millions of small structures called
nephrons that act as filtering units. The sterile liquid produced by
the kidney tubules is called urine. The urine passes out of the kidneys
down tubes called ureters. It is collected in the bladder, a muscular
sac that can store around 400-600 cm of urine. When the bladder
is getting full, the sphincter at the exit to the bladder opens and the
urine passes out of the body down the urethra.
bladder
urethra
Figure 1 The human urinary system
Kidney structure
If you slice open a kidney, you will see three main areas - the cortex
the medulla, and the pelvis (Figure 2).
The cortex is the dark outer layer. This is where the filtering of
the blood takes place and it has a very dense capillary network
carrying the blood from the renal artery to the nephrons.
The medulla is lighter in colour - it contains the tubules of the
nephrons that form the pyramids of the kidney and the collecting ducts.
The pelvis (which is Latin for basin) of the kidney is the central
chamber where the urine collects before passing out down the ureter.
Nephrons - the functional units of the kidney
In the nephrons the blood is filtered and then the majority of the
filtered material is returned to the blood, removing nitrogenous
420
15
15.8 Kidney failure
Table 1 To show average GFR in
healthy adults
Age (years)
Average eGFR
20-29
116
filtration rate (GFR) is widely used as a measure to indicate kidney
disease. The rate of filtration is not measured directly - a simple
blood test measures the level of creatinine in the blood. Creatinine is
a breakdown product of muscles and it is used to give an estimated
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). The units are cm/min. If the levels
of creatinine in the blood go up, it is a signal that the kidneys are not
working properly. Certain factors need to be taken into account in the
calculations to work out GFR. For example, GFR decreases steadily
with age even if you are healthy, and men usually have more muscle
mass and therefore more creatinine than women.
107
30-39
40-49
99
50-59
93
60-69
85
70+
75
Treating kidney failure with dialysis
As you can see in Table 1, normal GFRs do not fall below 70 even in
very elderly people. A GFR of below 60 for more than three months is
taken to indicate moderate to severe chronic kidney disease - and if it
falls below 15, that is kidney failure. The kidneys are filtering so little
blood they are virtually ineffective.
There are two main ways in which kidney failure is treated. In renal
dialysis, the function of the kidneys is carried out artificially. In a
transplant, a new healthy kidney is put into the body to replace the
functions of the failed kidneys - an animal can function perfectly well
with just one healthy kidney.
There are two main types of dialysis - haemodialysis and peritoneal
dialysis.
Haemodialysis
This involves the use of a dialysis machine. It is usually carried out in
hospital although sometimes patients will have a machine in their own
home. Blood leaves the patient's body from an artery and flows into the
dialysis machine, where it flows between partially permeable dialysis
membranes. These membranes mimic the basement membrane of the
Bowman's capsule. On the other side of the membranes is the dialysis
fluid. During dialysis it is vital that patients lose the excess urea and
mineral ions that have built up in the blood. It is equally important that
they do not lose useful substances such as glucose and some mineral ions.
blood thinners
prevent clotting
dialysis fluid carrying
waste products and
urea is removed
urea moves out
of the blood by
diffusion along a
concentration
gradient
Blood cells
and large
proteins
cannot
pass
through
the dialysis
membrane
there is no net
movement of
sugar and other
>substances needed
by the body
pump
arterial blood
leaves the arm
dialysis
fluid in
dialysis
fluid
clean blood
returns to a vein
in the arm
dialysis
machine
Blood flow
clean blood flows through
bubble trap to get rid of
any bubbles
dialysis membrane -
partially permeable
excess salt moves out of the
blood by diffusion along a
concentration gradient
dialysis fluid - no
urea, concentration
of sugar and mineral
ions the same as
the blood
A Figure 1 A dialysis machine relies on simple diffusion to remove waste products from the body
434
15.2 Thermoregulation in ectotherms
Specification reference: 5.1.1
The enzymes controlling the rates of the chemical reactions needed
Learning outcomes
for life are very temperature sensitive. Each enzyme has an optimum
Demonstrate knowledge,
temperature at which it works most efficiently. If the temperature
understanding, and application of:
gets too high the enzymes are denatured. An important aspect of
homeostasis in many animals is the maintenance of a relatively
the physiological and
constant core body temperature to maintain optimum enzyme activity.
behavioural responses
This process is known as thermoregulation,
involved in temperature
control in ectotherms.
Endotherms and ectotherms
Organisms are constantly heating up and cooling down as a result of
their surroundings. These changes depend on a number of physical
processes. These include:
Synoptic link
Exothermic chemical reactions.
You learnt about enzymes in
Latent heat of evaporation - objects cool down as water evaporates
Chapter 4, Enzymes.
from a surface.
Radiation - the transmission of electromagnetic waves to and from
the air, water, or ground.
Convection - the heating and cooling by currents of air
or water, warm air or water rises and cooler air or water
gains in heat
losses of heat
sinks setting up convection currents around an organism.
waste heat from
evaporation of
cell respiration
water
Conduction - heating as a result of the collision of
conduction from
conduction to
molecules. Air is not a good conductor of heat but the
surroundings
organism,
surroundings
ground and water are.
convection from
convection to
surroundings
surroundings
In many cases, the balance between heating and cooling
radiation from
radiation to
surroundings
determines the core temperature of the organism. Animals
surroundings
can be classified as ectotherms or endotherms depending
Figure 1 Ways in which animals warm up and cool down on how they maintain and control their body temperature.
Ectotherms
Most animals are ectotherms and use their surroundings to warm
their bodies (ectotherm literally means 'outside heat'). Their core body
temperature is heavily dependent on their environment. Ectotherms
include all the invertebrate animals, along with fish, amphibians, and
reptiles.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the properties of
water in Topic 3.2, Water.
Many ectotherms living in water do not need to thermoregulate.
The high heat capacity of water means that the temperature of
their environment does not change much. Ectotherms that live on
land have a much bigger problem with temperature regulation. The
temperature of the air can vary dramatically both between seasons
and even over a 24-hour period from the middle of the day to the end
of the night. As a result ectotherms have evolved a range of strategies
that enable them to cool down or warm up.
Endotherms
Mammals and birds are endotherms. They rely on their metabolic
processes to warm up and they usually maintain a very stable core
408
15
15.5 The structure and function of the mammalian kidney
&
Investigating the kidneys a
Lamb, pig, or even beef kidneys can be used to look at the
external and internal structures of these fascinating organs.
3 Slice the kidney open carefully using a scalpel or a
very sharp knife by making small cuts. Look carefully
and identify as many of the internal features as you
can (coloured pins are useful for this).
1
The protective layer of fat around kidneys (renal
capsule) is impressive - these vital organs are well-
cushioned from physical damage in the body (Figure 4).
renal vein
renal artery
renal pyramid
renal pelvis
renal medulla
renal cortex
Figure 4 Here the kidney is still
surrounded by perirenal fat (adipose
tissue)
2 After carefully removing the fat, the external
appearance of the kidney can be seen. You can see
the colour, the fibrous coat, the ureter, and if you are
skilful, you will be able to identify the renal artery and
vein as well (depending on whether these have been
left on by the butcher).
Figure 6 Labelled photo of a dissected kidney
Dissecting a kidney cannot show us the histology of
the kidneys. To observe the structure of the individual
nephrons requires a hand-lens or stained sections of
kidney tissue and a microscope. It is very difficult to see
an entire tubule but different parts of the tubules can
be identified (Figures 7 and 8). To make the nephrons
more visible a drop of hydrogen peroxide can be applied
onto the cut surface of the kidney (wearing safety
glasses and gloves). There will be rapid effervescence
(foaming), after this is wiped off, the renal tubules,
collecting duct, and loops of Henle should be a little
clearer to see as shown by strings of bubbles.
In a section through the cortex you will see Bowman's
capsules and glomeruli, as well as sections through
proximal and distal convoluted tubules. The lumen of
the distal tubules tends to be bigger and more open
than those of proximal tubules which can be helpful in
identifying them.
In a section through the medulla you will see mainly
loops of Henle and collecting duct. In a transverse
section you will see the lumens of the tubules - the
collecting ducts are larger than the thick ascending
loops of Henle while the thin-walled descending limbs
are only visible at very high magnifications. In a
longitudinal section you will see the parallel tubes - low
magnifications give an overall impression whilst higher
magnifications enable you to see individual tubules.
A Figure 5 External appearance of the
kidney once perirenal fat has been removed
422
15
HOMEOSTASIS
nephron
capsule
wastes and balancing the mineral ions and
water. Each nephron is around 3 cm long and
there are around 1.5 million nephrons in each
kidney. This provides the body with several
kilometres of tubules for the reabsorption of
water, glucose, salts, and other substances back
into the blood.
pyramid
cortex
medulla
renal vein
renal artery
Structure of the nephron
The main structures and functions of the
nephron are as follows:
branch of
renal artery
Bowman's capsule - cup-shaped
structure that contains the glomerulus, a
branch of
ureter
tangle of capillaries. More blood goes into
renal vein
the glomerulus than leaves it due to the
ultrafiltration processes that take place.
pelvis
Proximal convoluted tubule - the
A Figure 2 Internal structure of a kidney
first, coiled region of the tubule after the
Bowman's capsule, found in the cortex of the kidney.
This is where many of the substances needed by the
Bowman's proximal
distal
capsule convoluted tubule ,convoluted
body are reabsorbed into the blood
glomerulus
tubule
Loop of Henle - a long loop of tubule that creates efferent
a region with a very high solute concentration in
arteriole
cortex
the tissue fluid deep in the kidney medulla. The
afferent
descending loop runs down from the cortex through arteriole
the medulla to a hairpin bend at the bottom of the
I from
renal
loop. The ascending limb travels back up through
artery
the medulla to the cortex.
descending
limb of loop
medulla
Distal convoluted tubule - a second twisted
of Henle
collecting
tubule where the fine-tuning of the water balance
duct
of the body takes place. The permeability of the
capillary 4
ascending
walls to water varies in response to the levels of the networks
limb of loop
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) in the blood (ADH is
of Henle
explored in more detail in Topic 15.6, The kidney and
osmoregulation). Further regulation of the ion balance
loop of Henle
and pH of the blood also takes place in this tubule.
Collecting duct - the urine passes down the collecting
to pelvis
duct through the medulla to the pelvis. More fine-tuning
A Figure 3 The structure of a nephron and its blood supply
of the water balance takes place - the walls of this part of
the tubule are also sensitive to ADH.
The nephron has a network of capillaries around it which finally lead
Synoptic link
into a venule and then to the renal vein. The blood that leaves the
You learnt about arteries,
kidney has greatly reduced levels of urea, but the levels of glucose
arterioles, capillaries, venules,
and other substances such as amino acids needed by the body
and veins in Topic 8.2, The blood
are almost the same as when the blood entered the kidneys (may
vessels, and about the formation
be slightly less as some glucose will have been used for selective
of tissue fluid in Topic 8.3, Blood,
reabsorption). The mineral ion concentration in the blood has also
tissue fluid, and lymph.
been restored to ideal levels.
421
15
HOMEOSTASIS
are also important in many other aspects of homeostasis including
temperature control and the water balance of the body. The general
principles of negative feedback systems are shown in Figure 2.
increase
detected
responses
lower
levels
ideal
conditions
negative feedback
responses
raise
levels
decrease
detected
A Figure 2 The principles of negative feedback
Synoptic link
You learnt about the clotting
cascade in Topic 12.5, Non-
specific animal defences against
pathogens.
Positive feedback systems
There are relatively few positive feedback systems in the body. In a
positive feedback system, a change in the internal environment of the
body is detected by sensory receptors, and effectors are stimulated to
reinforce that change and increase the response. One example occurs
in the blood clotting cascade. When a blood vessel is damaged, platelets
stick to the damaged region and they release factors that initiate clotting
and attract more platelets. These platelets also add to the positive
feedback cycle and it continues until a clot is formed. Another example
of a positive feedback mechanism is seen during childbirth. The head
of the baby presses against the cervix, stimulating the production of the
hormone oxytocin. Oxytocin stimulates the uterus to contract, pushing
the head of the baby even harder against the cervix and triggering the
release of more oxytocin. This continues until the baby is born.
change
detected
responses
reinforce
change
conditions
change
positive feedback
Figure 3 The principles of positive
feedback
Summary questions
1 a Suggest three different types of receptors explaining what
changes they detect.
(3 marks)
b Suggest two different types of effector and give an example
of what they do.
(4 marks)
ining what
(2 marks)
2 a What is homeostasis?
b Why are both receptors and effectors important in
homeostasis?
(3 marks)
3 Suggest why effective homeostasis depends on negative
rather than positive feedback systems.
(6 marks)
407
