RESPIRATION
18
b
The electron micrograph shows a
mitochondrion from an animal cell
(x31400 magnification).
SA
(i) Name the structure labelled A.
(1 mark)
(ii) Name the specific process that is
carried out by structure A in the
mitochondrion.
(1 mark)
Some animals conserve energy by
entering a state of torpor (a short period
of dormancy), in which they allow their
body temperature to fall below normal for
a number of hours.
In an investigation into torpor in the
Siberian hamster, Phodopus sungorus, the
animal's respiratory quotient (RQ) was
measured before and during the period
of torpor.
The respiratory quotient is determined by
the following equation:
po volume of carbon dioxide produced
volume of oxygen consumed
in the same time
RQ values for different respiratory
substrates have been determined and are
shown in the table.
substrate
RO
carbohydrate
1.0
lipid
0.7
protein
0.9
(i)
Initially, the RQ value determined
for the hamster was 0.95, but as the
period of torpor progressed, its RQ
value decreased to 0.75.
What do these values suggest about
the substrates being respired by
the hamster during the period of
investigation?
(3 marks)
OCR F214 2010
497
18
RESPIRATION
The phosphorylation of ADP to form ATP is dependent on electrons
moving along electron transport chains. This requires the presence of
oxygen and is known as oxidative phosphorylation.
The hydrogens released from NAD and FAD could combine directly
with oxygen, releasing energy from the formation of bonds during
the production of water. However, this energy could not be used to
synthesise ATP. Heat released in the exothermic reaction would simply
raise the temperature of the cell.
Substrate level phosphorylation
Substrate level phosphorylation is the production of ATP involving
the transfer of a phosphate group from a short-lived, highly
reactive intermediate such as creatine phosphate. This is different
from oxidative phosphorylation which couples the flow of protons
down the electrochemical gradient through ATP synthase to the
phosphorylation of ADP to produce ATP.
Summary questions
1 Explain why hydrogens have to be actively pumped across
the membrane from the matrix and return to the matrix by
diffusion through ATP synthase.
Study tip
Oxidative phosphorylation is a
process that occurs along the
electron transport chain, which
involves a series of membrane-
bound enzyme complexes.
(4 marks)
2 Explain why the electrons released from reduced FAD lead
to the synthesis of less ATP than the electrons released
from reduced NAD.
(4 marks)
3 Cyanide is a respiratory poison. It attaches to the iron in the
haem group of cytochrome c oxidase in complex IV of the
electron transport chain.
Suggest an explanation for the toxicity of cyanide.
(4 marks)
Explain, with reasons, whether you agree
with the following statements.
(6 marks)
ATP synthase is not actually part of the electron transport chain.
Oxygen is required for the transfer of electrons along the electron
transport chain.
Hydrogen ions return to the matrix by facilitated diffusion.
487
18.5 Anaerobic respiration
Specification reference: 5.2.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the process of anaerobic
respiration in eukaryotes
practical investigations into
respiration rates in yeast,
under aerobic and anaerobic
conditions.
Aerobic respiration was not possible when life began, as there was
no oxygen present in the atmosphere of the Earth at that time. It
is a relatively new process in evolutionary terms but as it is a far
more efficient process than anaerobic respiration it was rapidly
selected for. Aerobic respiration produces around 38 molecules of
ATP per glucose molecule whereas fermentation (a form of anaerobic
respiration) only produces two molecules of ATP (net).
Anaerobic respiration in eukaryotic organisms
Eukaryotic cells respire aerobically if enough oxygen is available.
Anaerobic respiration, resulting in the synthesis of smaller quantities
of ATP, occurs in the absence of oxygen and is also used when oxygen
cannot be supplied fast enough to respiring cells. The use of this less
efficient process to produce ATP is a temporary 'emergency' measure
to keep vital processes functioning.
Organisms fall into different categories determined by their dependence
on oxygen or not:
obligate anaerobes - cannot survive in the presence of oxygen.
Almost all obligate anaerobes are prokaryotes, for example,
Clostridium (bacteria that cause food poisoning), although there are
some fungi as well.
facultative anaerobes - synthesise ATP by aerobic respiration if
oxygen is present, but can switch to anaerobic respiration in the
absence of oxygen, for example, yeast.
obligate aerobes - can only synthesise ATP in the presence of
oxygen, for example, mammals. The individual cells of some
organisms, such as muscle cells in mammals, can be described as
facultative anaerobes because they can supplement ATP supplies by
employing anaerobic respiration in addition to aerobic respiration
when the oxygen concentration is low. However, this is only for short
periods and oxygen is eventually required. The shortfall of oxygen
during the period of anaerobic respiration produces compounds that
have to be broken down when oxygen becomes available again, so
the organism as a whole is an obligate aerobe.
Fermentation
Fermentation (a form of anaerobic respiration) is the process by
which complex organic compounds are broken down into simpler
inorganic compounds without the use of oxygen or the involvement
of an electron transport chain. The organic compounds, such as
glucose, are not fully broken down so fermentation produces much
less ATP than aerobic respiration. The small quantity of ATP produced
is synthesised by substrate-level phosphorylation alone.
The end products of fermentation differ depending on the organism.
Alcoholic fermentation occurs in yeast and some plant root cells.
488
18
RESPIRATION
In eukaryotic cells, pyruvate enters the mitochondrial matrix
by active transport via specific carrier proteins. Pyruvate then
undergoes oxidative decarboxylation - carbon dioxide is removed
(decarboxylation) along with hydrogen (oxidation). The hydrogen
atoms removed are accepted by NAD. NAD is reduced to form NADH
(reduced NAD). The resulting two-carbon acetyl group is bound
by coenzyme A forming acetylcoenzyme A (acetyl CoA). The
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) name
for the acetyl group is the ethanoyl group, but the terms acetyl and
acetylcoenzyme A are so widely known and used by biologists that
the traditional names are retained.
Acetyl CoA delivers the acetyl group to the next stage of aerobic
respiration, known as the Krebs cycle. The reduced NAD is used in
oxidative phosphorylation to synthesise ATP (Topic 18.4, Oxidative
phosphorylation).
Acetyl groups are now all that is left of the original glucose molecules.
The carbon dioxide produced will either diffuse away and be removed
from the organism as a metabolic waste or, in autotrophic organisms,
it may be used as a raw material in photosynthesis.
Summary questions
1 Explain why the removal of carbon dioxide in the link
reaction is called oxidative.
Synoptic link
You learnt about coenzymes in
Topic 4.4, Cofactors, coenzymes,
and prosthetic groups.
(2 marks)
2 Name one organic compound and one inorganic compound
produced in the link reaction.
(2 marks)
(3 marks)
Study tip
3 Copy and complete the equation.
+ CoA + NAD → _ _ + C0, +.
Remember that each glucose
molecule produces two pyruvate
molecules which both go through
the subsequent stages.
4 Suggest why glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm but not
the mitochondrial matrix.
(4 marks)
483
18
RESPIRATION
Here the end products are ethanol (an alcohol) and carbon dioxide.
Lactate fermentation results in the production of lactate and is
carried out in animal cells.
When there is no oxygen to act as the final electron acceptor at the
end of the electron transport chain in oxidative phosphorylation,
the flow of electrons stops. This means the synthesis of ATP by
chemiosmosis also stops.
As the flow of electrons along the electron transport chain has
stopped, the reduced NAD and reduced FAD are no longer able to be
oxidised because there is nowhere for the electrons to go. This means
NAD and FAD cannot be regenerated and so the decarboxylation and
oxidation of pyruvate and the Krebs cycle comes to a halt as there are
no coenzymes available to accept the hydrogens being removed.
Glycolysis would also come to halt due to the lack of NAD if it were
not for the process of fermentation.
Lactate fermentation in mammals
In mammals, pyruvate can act as a hydrogen acceptor taking
the hydrogen from reduced NAD, catalysed by the enzyme
pyruvate
lactate
lactate dehydrogenase. The pyruvate is converted to
lactate (lactic acid) and NAD is regenerated. This can be used
to keep glycolysis going so a small quantity of ATP is still
synthesised. In mammals in particular, anaerobic respiration
in the muscles is often supported by ATP from aerobic
respiration, which is still being produced as fast as oxygen
reduced NAD
NAD
can be delivered in other parts of the body.
Figure 1 Summary of lactate fermentation in mammals
Lactic acid is converted back to glucose in the liver but
oxygen is needed to complete this process. This is the reason for the
oxygen debt (and the need to breathe heavily) after exercise.
Lactate fermentation cannot occur indefinitely for two main reasons:
the reduced quantity of ATP produced would not be enough to
maintain vital processes for a long period of time
the accumulation of lactic acid causes a fall in pH leading to
proteins denaturing. Respiratory enzymes and muscle filaments
are made from proteins and will cease to function at low pH.
Lactic acid is removed from muscles and taken to the liver in the
bloodstream. One of the main aims when improving physical fitness is
to increase the blood supply and flow, through muscles. This increases
the rate of lactic acid removal allowing the intensity and duration of
exercise to be increased.
OO
ethanol
pyruvate
ethanal
Alcoholic fermentation in yeast (and many plants)
s
Alcoholic fermentation is not a reversible process
like lactate fermentation. Pyruvate is first converted
to ethanal, catalysed by the enzyme pyruvate
decarboxylase. Ethanal can then accept a hydrogen
atom from reduced NAD, becoming ethanol. The
regenerated NAD can then continue to act as a
coenzyme and glycolysis can continue.
reduced NAD
NAD
A Figure 2 Summary of alcoholic fermentation in yeast and plant cells
489
18
18.5 Anaerobic respiration
This is not a short-term process and can continue indefinitely in
the absence of oxygen. Ethanol is a toxic waste product to yeast
cells and they are unable survive iſ the ethanol accumulates above
approximately 15%. This is allowed to happen during the production
of alcohol in brewing or wine making.
Investigation into respiration rates in yeast
interface
The apparatus shown could be used to measure the rate
of carbon dioxide production of a yeast suspension. This
will be equivalent to the rate of anaerobic respiration or
alcoholic fermentation of the yeast cells.
temperature sensor
The glucose in solution provides a respiratory substrate.
The flask is sealed during the experiment to ensure
anaerobic conditions.
vacuum
flask
computer
Figure 4
As the yeast respires carbon dioxide is released increasing
the volume of gas in the flask. As the volume of gas in
the tube increases the pressure will increase causing
the coloured liquid to move along the capillary tube. The
distance moved by the liquid together with diameter of the
tube can be used to calculate the increase in volume of
gas (carbon dioxide) in the flask over a certain time. This
is a measure of the rate of respiration.
stained
water drop
The student placed a solution containing yeast and
glucose in the flask and inserted a carbon dioxide sensor.
The solution was covered with a layer of liquid paraffin.
The software was set up to record readings every
50 seconds for 1600 seconds.
The readings were displayed in graphical form shown in
Figure 5.
5000
water
brewer's yeast
carbohydrates
4000 -
3000
Figure 3 Diagram
showing the apparatus
used to measure the
anaerobic respiration
in yeast
Š 2000
1000
0
Data logging
Respiration is not 100% efficient and energy is lost as
heat when organisms respire.
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
time/s
A Figure 5
When yeast respires it produces heat which will increase
the temperature of a solution containing yeast. Sensors
can be used to measure changes in temperature.
A student carried out an investigation into respiration in
yeast using a data logger to measure the changes in carbon
dioxide concentration as a measure of the rate of respiration.
1 Explain why the student did the following:
Carried out the investigation in a vacuum flask
Covered the solution containing the yeast with
liquid paraffin
2 Calculate, using Figure 5, the fastest rate of
respiration observed during the investigation.
3 Suggest why the graph eventually reached a plateau.
Describe how the apparatus could be adapted to
investigate aerobic respiration.
The student set up the apparatus to be used as shown in
Figure 4.
490
18.3 The Krebs cycle
Specification reference: 5.2.2
The Krebs cycle also takes place in the mitochondrial matrix and each
complete cycle results in the breakdown of an acetyl group. Acetyl
groups are all that remain of the glucose that entered glycolysis. It is
another complex multi-step pathway, summarised here.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the process and site of the
Krebs cycle
the importance of coenzymes
in cellular respiration.
As in the previous stages, the Krebs cycle involves decarboxylation,
dehydrogenation, and substrate-level phosphorylation. The hydrogen
atoms released are picked up by the coenzymes NAD and flavin
adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Carbon dioxide is a by-product of
these reactions and the ATP produced is available for use by energy-
requiring processes within the cell.
The reduced NAD and reduced FAD produced are used in the
final, oxygen-requiring step of aerobic respiration (Topic 18.4,
Oxidative phosphorylation) to produce large quantities of ATP by
chemiosmosis.
8 pyruvic acid
NAD+
CO2+ reduced NAD
acetyl-CoA
citric acid (6C)
COA
OAA (4C)
reduced NAD
NAD+
reduced NAD
NAD+ -
- NAD+
reduced NAD
FADHO
FAD
ATR ADP+;P
Figure 1 The Krebs cycle
Acetyl CoA delivers an acetyl group to the Krebs cycle. The two-
carbon acetyl group combines with four-carbon oxaloacetate to
form six-carbon citrate.
The citrate molecule undergoes decarboxylation and
dehydrogenation producing one reduced NAD and carbon dioxide.
A five-carbon compound is formed.
The five-carbon compound undergoes further decarboxylation and
dehydrogenation reactions, eventually regenerating oxaloacetate,
3
484
18
18.5 Anaerobic respiration
Summary questions
Synoptic link
It may be useful to look back at
Topic 3.11, ATP.
1 Explain why yeast cells are described as facultative anaerobes.
(2 marks)
2 Describe why alcoholic fermentation can be described as having more in
common with aerobic respiration than with fermentation. (3 marks)
Study tip
3 Explain why the build-up of lactic acid eventually stops
muscle contraction which we experience as fatigue.
(4 marks)
Lactate fermentation is important
because it regenerates NAD which
allows glycolysis to continue.
Lactate, or lactic acid, is not a waste
product, it is recycled as glucose.
4 Glycolysis, the anaerobic stage of respiration, is the only source
of ATP in red blood cells. Cardiac muscle is adapted to reduce the
chances of anaerobic respiration ever being needed.
Outline the benefits to red blood cells and cardiac muscle of
the different types of respiration they undertake.
(6 marks)
492
18.4 Oxidative phosphorylation
Specification reference: 5.2.2
Oxidative phosphorylation
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the process and site of
oxidative phosphorylation.
The hydrogen atoms that have been collected by the coenzymes NAD
and FAD are delivered to electron transport chains present in the
membranes of the cristae of the mitochondria.
The hydrogen atoms dissociate into hydrogen ions and electrons. The
high energy electrons are used in the synthesis of ATP by chemiosmosis.
Energy is released during redox reactions as the electrons reduce and
oxidise electron carriers as they flow along the electron transport chain.
This energy is used to create a proton gradient leading to the diffusion of
protons through ATP synthase resulting in the synthesis of ATP.
Synoptic link
You learnt about chemiosmosis in
Topic 17.2, ATP synthesis.
At the end of the electron transport chain the electrons combine
with hydrogen ions and oxygen to form water. Oxygen is the final
electron acceptor and the electron chain cannot operate unless oxygen
is present. Respiration which involves the complete breakdown of
glucose is therefore an aerobic process.
reduced NAD
reduced FAD
075
complex
complex II
complex III
complex IV
e
I(0
)
+
electron transport
chain
H20
Figure 1 Electron transport chain in respiration
Synoptic link
You learnt about coenzymes in
Topic 4.4, Cofactors, coenzymes.
486
18
RESPIRATION
and so the cycle continues. More carbon dioxide, two more
reduced NADs, and one reduced FAD are produced. ATP is also
produced by substrate-level phosphorylation.
The importance of coenzymes in respiration
Respiration is a complex multi-step reaction pathway. Coenzymes are
required to transfer protons, electrons, and functional groups between
many of these enzyme-catalysed reactions.
Redox reactions have an important role in respiration and without
coenzymes transferring electrons and protons between these reactions
many respiratory enzymes would be unable to function.
NAD and FAD are both coenzymes that accept protons and electrons
released during the breakdown of glucose in respiration. The
differences between these two enzymes are:
• NAD takes part in all stages of cellular respiration but FAD only
accepts hydrogens in the Krebs cycle
NAD accepts one hydrogen and FAD accepts two hydrogens
reduced NAD is oxidised at the start of the electron transport chain
releasing protons and electrons while reduced FAD is oxidised
further along the chain
reduced NAD results in the synthesis of three ATP molecules but
reduced FAD results in the synthesis of only two ATP molecules.
You will see reduced NAD represented in a number of ways - for
example, NADH, NADH + H+, or NADH,+. The reason for this is that
NAD is actually charged so is more accurately represented as NAD+.
When NAD+ is reduced it accepts two protons and an electron pair
(from a C-H bond) forming NADH + H+. NADH, or reduced NAD, then
transfers the proton and electron pair to a subsequent reaction.
Study tip
Oxaloacetate and citrate are
the only names of Krebs cycle
intermediate compounds that you
need to remember.
The number of ATP molecules
produced as a result of reduced
NAD and reduced FAD can vary.
Coenzymes are usually derived from vitamins. This is why, although
coenzymes are mostly recycled, vitamins are an essential micronutrient.
Summary questions
1 Compare the structures of ATP and NAD. (3 marks) 4 Calculate the number of ATP molecules produced by
substrate-level phosphorylation after two rounds
ATP can be described as a coenzyme.
of the Krebs cycle.
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
Explain why.
The Krebs cycle does not use oxygen at any
3 Draw a simple diagram summarising the breakdown
point. Suggest why the Krebs cycle is termed
of glucose to carbon dioxide and reduced
aerobic.
(4 marks)
coenzymes.
(4 marks)
6 00 Suggest a reason for the involvement of FAD
rather than NAD in only one specific step of the
Krebs cycle.
(6 marks)
485
18
RESPIRATION
Small-scale and large-scale adaptations to low oxygen environments
Many animals live in or around water and spend time
underwater to hunt for food. These animals are adapted
in a variety of ways to survive periods of anaerobic
respiration while they cannot breathe air. Many bacteria
also live in low oxygen environments. There are many
adaptations that have evolved in different organisms to
overcome the problems of a temporary or permanent lack
of oxygen:
Figure 6 Sperm whale (Physeter
macrocephalus) tail
Bacterial adaptations
Different groups of bacteria have evolved to use nitrate
ions, sulphate ions, and carbon dioxide as final electron
acceptors in anaerobic respiration. This enables them to
live in very low, or zero, oxygen environments.
Anaerobic bacteria present in the digestive systems of
animals play an essential role in the breakdown of food
and absorption of minerals. Methanogens are a type of
bacteria found in the digestive system of ruminants,
such as cows. They digest cellulose from grass cell walls
into products that can be further digested, absorbed and
used by the ruminants. The final electron acceptor in the
respiratory pathway of these bacteria is carbon dioxide,
and methane and water are produced. The methane
builds up and eventually has to be released - it has
been estimated that a cow produces around 500 L of
methane per day.
2 Physiological adaptations in many diving mammals
include a modified circulatory system. When they
dive they show peripheral vasoconstriction, so blood
is shunted to the brain, heart, and muscles. The heart
slows by up to 85% - this is known as bradycardia
and reduces the energy demand of the heart muscle.
Whales also exchange 80-95% of the air in the lungs
when they breathe - in humans, that figure is around
15%. In some species dives can last up to two hours,
so the adaptations are very effective.
Physical adaptations include streamlining to reduce
drag due to friction from water while swimming,
therefore reducing the energy demand during a dive.
The limbs of marine mammals are 'fin-shaped' to
maximise the efficient use of energy in propulsion.
Mammalian adaptations
Marine mammals that dive for long periods, such as seals
and whales, have a range of different types of adaptations
for surviving when they cannot take in more oxygen:
1 Biochemical adaptations include greater
concentrations of haemoglobin and myoglobin than
land mammals, particularly in the muscles used
in swimming. This maximises their oxygen stores,
delaying the onset of anaerobic metabolism. Whales
have a higher tolerance to lactic acid than human
beings, so they can respire anaerobically much longer
without suffering tissue damage. They also have a
greater tolerance of high carbon dioxide levels - they
have very effective blood buffering systems that
prevent a catastrophic rise in pH.
1 The lungs of whales are proportionally no larger
than humans but some whales can stay under
water for two hours. Suggest how the lungs
might be adapted to enable these long dives and
why larger lungs would be a disadvantage to a
whale.
2 Summarise the adaptations of whales for making
long underwater dives.
491
18
RESPIRATION
T
T
15
B
T TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT
Practical investigations into the factors affecting rate of respiration using respirometers
A student carried out an
Table 1
experiment to investigate the
- coloured fluid
Temperature (°C) Respirometer Contents
effect of temperature on the
graduated tube
30 soaked pea seeds
rate of respiration in soaked
glass beads + 30 dry
(germinating) pea seeds and
pea seeds
dry (dormant) pea seeds.
glass beads
A 30 soaked pea seeds
A respirometer was used,
glass beads + 30 dry
shown in Figure 2. The
B
pea seeds
potassium hydroxide
glass beads
solution in this apparatus
absorbs carbon dioxide. If
At each temperature, respirometer C, which contained
pea seed
the apparatus is kept at a
only glass beads, was a control. After the student had
constant temperature, any
mesh
left each respirometer to equilibrate, a small volume of
changes in the volume of air
potassium
coloured fluid was introduced into each graduated tube.
hydroxide solution
in the respirometer will be
The respirometers were then left in the appropriate water
due to oxygen uptake. The Figure 2
baths for 20 minutes and maintained at the correct
student set up three respirometers, A, B and C in water
temperature. During this time, the coloured fluid in the
baths at two different temperatures. The respirometers
graduated tube moved. The level of the coloured fluid in each
were left for 10 minutes to equilibrate.
respirometer was recorded at the start of the experiment
The contents of each respirometer are shown in Table 1. and after 20 minutes. The results are summarised in Table 2.
Table 2
Temperature Respirometer Reading at Reading after Difference Corrected Rate of oxygen
start (cm) 20 minutes (cm) (cm) difference (cm) uptake (cmmin-1)
0.93
0.74
0.19
0.008
0.93
0.86
0.07
0.04
0.002
C
0.91
0.88
0.03
A
0.94
0.63
0.31
0.27
B
0.93
0.84
0.09
0.05
0.003
C
0.95
0.91
0.04
0.16
4
Study tip
1 Copy and complete the table.
2 Suggest why, at each
temperature, respirometer B
contained some glass beads.
Suggest how the student
determined the quantity of glass
beads to place in respirometer B
at each temperature.
Explain why there is an
increased rate of respiration in
soaked seeds at 25°C compared
with soaked seeds at 15°C.
Suggest a reason for the
difference in the rate of
respiration between soaked and
dry pea seeds.
A respirometer is not the same as a
spirometer. A spirometer measures
volume changes during breathing
but a respirometer measures the
change in volume of oxygen or
carbon dioxide.
(4 marks)
(3 marks)
Summary questions
1 Outline the respiration pathway of a triglyceride.
2 Describe the difference between a respirometer and a spirometer.
3 Consider the three respiratory substrates A CH,OH
shown here.
Calculate the percentage of hydrogen in each
molecule and use these to compare the
relative energy values of the substrates.
H OH
B
LA OH
H
CH3(CH2)16COOH
0
I-O-
N
ö-0I
—
C
—
C
O-IO-
OI
I-O-O
H
(6 marks)
495
RESPIRATION
ATP]
+ATP
ATP
The main steps in glycolysis are:
ooooo
glucose
1 Phosphorylation - the first step of
ATP
glycolysis requires two molecules
of ATP. Two phosphates, released
Poooooo
from the two ATP molecules, are
hexose bisphosphate
attached to a glucose molecule
forming hexose bisphosphate.
POO
OOP
Lysis - this destabilises the
triose
triose
molecule causing it to split
phosphate phosphate
into two triose phosphate
molecules.
3 Phosphorylation - another
POOP POO
phosphate group is added to
triose
triose
each triose phosphate forming
bisphosphate bisphosphate
two triose bisphosphate
ATPⓇI
ATP
ATP
molecules. These phosphate
I
groups come from free inorganic
- ATP
ATP
phosphate (P:) ions present in reduced NAD
V reduced NADI
the cytoplasm.
000
4 Dehydrogenation and formation
pyruvate
Pyruvate
of ATP - the two triose
A Figure 2 Summary of glycolysis
bisphosphate molecules are then
oxidised by the removal of hydrogen atoms (dehydrogenation)
to form two pyruvate molecules. NAD coenzymes accept the
Synoptic link
removed hydrogens - they are reduced, forming two reduced NAD
It may be useful to look back to
molecules.
Topic 4.4, Cofactors, coenzymes,
At the same time, four ATP molecules are produced using phosphates and prosthetic groups and
from the triose bisphosphate molecules.
Topic 3.11, ATP.
IⓇ
ATP
ATP
P
This is an example of substrate level phosphorylation – the formation
of ATP without the involvement of an electron transport chain. ATP
is formed by the transfer of a phosphate group from a phosphorylated
intermediate (in this case triose bisphosphate) to ADP.
TWO ATP molecules are used to prime the process at the beginning,
and four ATP molecules are produced, so the overall net ATP yield
from glycolysis is two molecules of ATP.
Study tip
Hexose bisphosphate, triose
phosphate, and pyruvate are the
only compounds that you have to
be able to recall.
The reduced NAD is used in a later stage to synthesise more ATP.
Summary questions
1 Describe the processes of dehydrogenation, dehydration,
and phosphorylation.
(3 marks)
2 Explain how NAD acts as a coenzyme in glycolysis.
(3 marks)
(3 marks)
3 Explain the meaning of substrate-level phosphorylation.
4 Oo Outline the importance of dehydrogenation
and phosphorylation in glycolysis.
(5 marks)
481
18.2 Linking glycolysis
and the Krebs cycle
Specification reference: 5.2.2
As you have learnt, glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm of the cell.
In eukaryotic cells the remaining aerobic (oxygen-requiring) reactions
of cellular respiration take place inside the mitochondria.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the link reaction and its site in
the cell
► the structure of the
mitochondrion.
outer mitochondrial membrane
matrix
separates the contents of the mitochondrion contains enzymes for the
from the rest of the cell, creating a cellular Krebs cycle and the link reaction,
compartment with ideal conditions for also contains mitochondrial DNA
aerobic respiration
intermembrane space
Proteins are pumped
inner mitochondrial
into this space by the
membrane contains
electron transport chain.
electron transport
The space is small so the
chains and ATP synthase
concentration builds up
quickly
cristae are projections of the inner membrane
which increase the surface area available for
oxidative phosphorylation
Figure 1 In the presence of oxygen, aerobic respiration occurs in the mitochondria
of eukaryotic cells
Synoptic link
You learnt about mitochondria in
Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic cell structure.
Study tip
Be careful to distinguish, and
correctly use, the terms 'inner'
(mitochondrial membrane) and
'inter' (membrane space).
Oxidative decarboxylation (the link reaction)
The first step in aerobic respiration is oxidative decarboxylation. This
is sometimes referred to as the link reaction, because it is the step that
links anaerobic glycolysis, occurring in the cytoplasm, to the aerobic
steps of respiration, occurring in the mitochondria.
pyruvate
reduced NAD
00 +
acetyl group
coenzyme A
coenzyme A
acetylcoenzyme A
Figure 2 Summary of oxidative decarboxylation, linking the
anaerobic and aerobic stages of cellular respiration in eukaryotic cells
482
18
Chapter 18 Practice questions
b
Practice questions
1a (i) State the meaning of the term
phosphorylation.
(1 mark)
(ii) Outline the similarities and differences
between oxidative phosphorylation
and substrate level phosphorylation.
(3 marks)
b NADH and FADH transfer electrons to the
electron transport chain.
10 protons are pumped due to the
electrons from NADH
6 protons are pumped due to the electrons
from FADH
4 protons are needed by ATP synthase to
make one ATP molecule
(i) Calculate the number of ATP
molecules produced due to each
reduced coenzyme. Show your
working
(3 marks)
(ii) Calculate the total number of ATP
molecules produced due to oxidative
phosphorylation. Show your working
in your answer.
(3 marks)
2 a The diagram represents the first stage of
respiration.
(i) Name the stage represented by the
figure.
(1 mark)
(ii) State precisely where in the cell this
stage takes place.
(1 mark)
(iii) Identify the compounds D, E, and F.
(3 marks)
In anaerobic conditions, compound F does
not proceed to oxidative decarboxylation.
Describe the fate of compound F during
anaerobic respiration in an animal cell
and explain the importance of this
reaction.
(5 marks)
The diagram shows a common seal, Phoca
vitulina, an aquatic mammal.
The seal comes to the surface of the
water to obtain air and it can then stay
underwater for over 20 minutes.
The figure shows a seal at the surface of
the water and the following diagram shows
the same animal when submerging again.
glucose
ATP
hexose phosphate
Suggest how the seal is adapted to respire
for such a long time underwater. (3 marks)
OCR F214 2010
The diagram represents a molecule of ATP.
hexose bisphosphate
3
base X<
N
2x triose phosphate
2x E
sugar Y
2 x 2 ATP
2x reduced E+
2 x F
(i) Name the parts of the ATP molecule
labelled X, Y, and Z. (3 marks)
(ii) With reference to the figure, describe
and explain the role of ATP in
the cell.
(3 marks)
496
1:
RESPIRATION
18.1 Glycolysis
Specification reference: 5.2.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the process and site of
glycolysis.
Cellular respiration
Glucose is a hexose (six-carbon sugar) produced during photosynthesis.
It is a complex molecule containing energy absorbed from sunlight
'trapped' within its carbon hydrogen bonds. Respiration is essentially
the reverse of photosynthesis.
The carbon framework of glucose is broken down and the carbon-
hydrogen bonds broken. The energy released is then used in the
synthesis of ATP by chemiosmosis. ATP, the universal energy
currency, is constantly synthesised and used in energy-requiring
reactions and processes.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the need for cellular
respiration and ATP formation by
chemiosmosis in Topic 17.1, Energy
cycles.
Respiration is a complex multi-step reaction pathway (Figure 1). You
will be considering respiration in eukaryotic cells. A similar process
takes place in prokaryotic cells but they do not have mitochondria
so many of the reactions take place on cell membranes. To make the
biochemistry of respiration clearer to understand you will look at it in
stages, but it is important to remember that in the cell the process is
continuous. The first stage of respiration is glycolysis.
fermentation
lactate
glycolysis
anaerobic
ethanol
+ CO2
glucose —
pyruvate
link reaction
Krebs cycle
electron transport
chain
aerobic
2H
oxygen
acetyl
Coenzyme
water
A Figure 1 Summary of respiration
Glycolysis
Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell. It does not require
oxygen - it is an anaerobic process. Glucose, a six-carbon sugar,
is split into two smaller, three-carbon pyruvate molecules. ATP and
reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) are also produced.
Glycolysis, summarised here, actually involves 10 reaction steps
involving many enzymes.
480
18
18.6 Respiratory substrates
During normal activity, the RQ is in the range of 0.8 to 0.9, showing
that carbohydrates and lipids (and probably some proteins) are being
use as respiratory substrates.
During anaerobic respiration, the RQ increases above 1.0, although
this not easy to measure as the point at which anaerobic respiration
begins is not easy to pinpoint.
Calculating the respiratory quotient
The oxygen taken in and carbon dioxide produced by
a desert locust was measured experimentally under
different conditions:
Conditions
at rest in flight
Oxygen absorbed/au 10.5 160.0
Carbon dioxide produced/au 10.0 113.6
1 Calculate the RQ of the insect at rest and
in flight.
2. What does this suggest about the substrate
being respired at rest and in flight?
T
Low carbohydrate diets
Many people choose low carbohydrate diets when they
want to lose weight - and in particular to lose some
body fat. The diets can work - but the science suggests
that you need to think carefully before cutting out the
molecules that are most commonly used as fuel in your
body. Here are some of the facts about low carbohydrate
diets for you to consider:
1 Triglycerides are hydrolysed into fatty acids and glycerol.
The fatty acids are broken down in the mitochondria to
give many two-carbon acetyl groups that combine with
coenzyme A molecules and enter the Krebs cycle.
Triglycerides cannot act as the only respiratory
substrate. Carbohydrates are needed to keep the Krebs
cycle going so that acetyl groups from the breakdown
of fatty acids can be 'fed in'. If carbohydrates are in
short supply the body will make them using a process
called gluconeogenesis. This process often uses
glycerol, but it may also use pyruvate from glycolysis.
3 Oxaloacetate from the Krebs cycle can be used to
make glucose when carbohydrate levels are low.
Reducing the number of oxaloacetate molecules in
the Krebs cycle reduces the rate at which the acetyl
groups produced during the breakdown of lipids can
be fed into the cycle and produce ATP.
4 Oxaloacetate can be replaced by the conversion
of pyruvate from carbohydrate breakdown in the
mitochondria. Pyruvate is also synthesised using
glycerol from the breakdown of lipids. However, the
breakdown of a lipid molecule provides a relatively
small quantity of glycerol and so a relatively small
amount of pyruvate. This means carbohydrates are
still needed to ensure the continued respiration of fat.
Proteins can be hydrolysed into amino acids which
are then deaminated in the liver. The remaining keto
acids can be converted into glucose molecules. Lean
muscle is the protein of choice in this process, so
a low carbohydrate diet can lead to the breakdown
of muscle tissue. The liver and kidneys also have to
remove the nitrogenous waste.
If the level of acetyl CoA increases because it is not being
taken into the Krebs cycle, the liver starts converting it
into ketone bodies. Brain cells normally require glucose
as an energy source. They cannot use fatty acids as a
respiratory substrate but they can use ketone bodies.
7 When the body is producing more ketone bodies
than usual, it is said to be in ketosis. This can lead
to a dangerous condition known as ketoacidosis.
Ketoacidosis is the result of an accumulation of
ketone bodies which cause the pH level of the blood to
drop to dangerous, or even fatal, levels. This condition
is often seen in alcoholics, untreated diabetes, and
during starvation. It is often diagnosed by the fruity
smell of propanone (acetone), a breakdown product
of ketone bodies, on the breath of an affected person.
1
The term 'fats burn in the flame of carbohydrates'
was coined more than a century ago. Discuss the
accuracy of this statement.
Evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of a low
carbohydrate diet.
2
494
18.6 Respiratory substrates
Specification reference: 5.2.2
Different respiratory substrates
Learning outcomes
Glucose is not the only organic molecule that is broken down
to release energy for the synthesis of ATP. There are many other
Demonstrate knowledge,
respiratory substrates. Triglycerides are hydrolysed to fatty acids,
understanding, and application of:
which enter the Krebs cycle via acetyl COA and glycerol.
→ the difference in relative energy
Glycerol is first converted to pyruvate before undergoing oxidative
values of carbohydrates, lipids,
decarboxylation, producing an acetyl group which is picked up by
and proteins as respiratory
coenzyme A, forming acetyl CoA. The fatty acids in a triglyceride
substrates
molecule can lead to the formation of as many as 50 acetyl COA
the use and interpretation of
molecules, resulting in the synthesis of up to 500 ATP molecules.
the respiratory quotient (RO)
Gram for gram, lipids store and release about twice as much energy as
practical investigations into
carbohydrates. Alcohol contains more energy than carbohydrates but
the effect of factors such
less than lipids. Proteins are roughly equivalent to carbohydrates.
as temperature, substrate
Proteins first have to be hydrolysed to amino acids and then the
concentration, and different
amino acids have to be deaminated (removal of amine groups) before
respiratory substrates on the
they enter the respiratory pathway, usually via pyruvate. These steps
rate of respiration.
require ATP, reducing the net production of ATP.
The respiratory quotient (RQ) of a substrate
liver/muscle
is calculated by dividing the volume of carbon
glycogen
dioxide released by the volume of oxygen
taken in during respiration of that particular adipose tissue
glucose
substrate. This is measured using a simple piece triglyceride
of apparatus called a respirometer (Figure 2).
glycolysis
CO, produced
liver
RQ =
O, consumed
amino acid
glycerol
pyruvate
It takes six oxygen molecules to completely
lactate
respire one molecule of glucose and this results in
oxidative
the production of six molecules of carbon dioxide
decarboxylation
(and six molecules of water). This results in an
RQ of 1.0.
fatty acids
acetyl group
ketone bodies
in acetyl COA
Lipids contain a greater proportion of carbon-
beta oxidation
brain
hydrogen bonds than carbohydrates which is why
(Krebs
they produce so much more ATP in respiration.
cycle
Due to the greater number of carbon-hydrogen
oxidative phosphorylation
bonds, lipids require relatively more oxygen to
break them down and release relatively less carbon
A Figure 1 The diagram shows how different biological molecules, and
dioxide. This results in RQs of less than one for
fragments of these molecules, can be 'fed into the respiratory pathway
at different points. Some tissues, or organs, are better adapted to use
lipids. The structure of amino acids leads to RQS
certain substrates. For example, the brain is well adapted to use ketone
somewhere between carbohydrates and lipids.
bodies as a respiratory substrate
carbohydrates = 1.0
protein = 0.9
lipids = 0.7
So, by measuring the volume of oxygen taken in and carbon dioxide
released, and calculating RQ, the type of substrate being used for
respiration at that point can be roughly determined.
493
