17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Suggest what you think would be the basic components
of an artificial photosynthetic process.
Artificial photosynthesis is seen as a possible solution. By
improving on the natural process of photosynthesis carried
out by plants, more carbon dioxide could be removed from
the atmosphere and more carbohydrate products could be
produced which could help with fuel and food shortages.
Different types of photosynthesis
Most plants use the form of photosynthesis that you
have learnt about in this chapter. This is referred to as
C3 photosynthesis, and it is most efficient in cool, wet
climates with average sunshine values.
deeper inside the plant. These molecules are then
decarboxylated, and the carbon dioxide is then fixed
by RuBisCO and enters the Calvin cycle. As RuBisCO
is shielded from atmospheric oxygen, the waste of
resources by photorespiration is reduced. Corn is an
example of a C4 plant.
Plants that live in hot, arid climates like the desert which
are exposed to intense sunlight use different types of
photosynthesis. Plants which use C4 and crassulacean
acid metabolism (CAM) types of photosynthesis use
water more efficiently and can photosynthesise at
faster rates at higher temperatures and light intensities.
Plants are adapted to their different environments to
photosynthesise as efficiently as possible.
CAM photosynthesis
Other plants use CAM photosynthesis and open their
stomata at night, usually closing them during the day,
again reducing water loss by transpiration. Carbon dioxide
is converted to an acid and stored during the night.
During the day the acid is broken back down releasing
carbon dioxide to RuBisCO. During very dry spells stomata
can remain closed night and day. The carbon dioxide
released from respiration is used in photosynthesis
and the oxygen released by photosynthesis is used for
respiration. Cacti are CAM plants.
C4 photosynthesis
Plants that undergo C4 photosynthesis are adapted
to high temperatures and limited water supply. They
are able to fix carbon dioxide more efficiently and so
do not need to have their stomata open for as long
as C3 plants meaning there is less water lost by
transpiration.
PEP carboxylase present in mesophyll cells, which
first fixes carbon dioxide, is not inhibited by oxygen
(like RuBisCO), increasing the efficiency of fixation.
The four-carbon molecules produced are transported
to bundle sheaths, formed from tightly packed cells,
1 Some plants drop their leaves and twigs and
become dormant during dry spells. Describe the
way in which a cactus survives dry spells and the
advantages of this method.
2 Suggest why CAM plants can only keep their
stomata closed night and day for short periods.
Summary questions
1 Describe what is meant by a limiting factor.
(3 marks)
Study tip
2 Suggest why the rate of oxygen production is only an estimate
of the rate of photosynthesis.
(2 marks)
Always refer to light intensity'
rather than 'level' or 'amount'. When
referring to rate of photosynthesis
it is often a good idea to refer to the
rate of the Calvin cycle or carbon
fixation as an example.
© Discuss, using what you have learnt in this chapter, how an
understanding of the effect of limiting factors on the rate of
photosynthesis is used to design more efficient glasshouses. (5 marks)
477
17
Chapter 17 Practice questions
2
It is known that C4-type plants carry out a
much more efficient type of photosynthesis
than C3 plants particularly under conditions
of high light intensity and temperature.
The graph shows the changes in rate of
photosynthesis for a C3 and C4 plant at
different light intensities.
Practice questions
1 Photosynthesis is dependent on a supply
of water, light energy, and carbon dioxide.
Restricting the supply of any one of these
factors reduces the rate of photosynthesis
regardless of the availability of the other
factors. A lower rate of photosynthesis
results in a lower rate of growth and this has
important implications for commercial plant
growers.
a Outline the problems that commercial
plant growers might have when using
glasshouses.
(3 marks)
The graph shows the changes in
photosynthesis and respiration rates over
a range of temperatures for tomato plants
grown in a glasshouse. Tomatoes need to
have reached a certain size and sweetness
before they can be sold.
assimilates produced
in photosynthesis
orate of photosynthesis
a
light intensity level
State which curve in the graph is the
C3 plant.
(1 mark)
Plants are often adapted to grow in bright
sunshine or shade, even leaves on the same
tree can develop differently depending on
the conditions they are exposed to.
The graph shows the changes in rate of
photosynthesis in sun and shade leaves at
different light intensities.
growth potential
rate of photosynthesis/respiration
assimilates
used in respiration
rate of photosynthesis
40
96
b
light intensity level
temperature (°F)
(i) Describe, and explain, the changes
in rates of photosynthesis and
respiration shown in the diagram.
(5 marks)
(ii) Discuss how these changes would
affect the saleability of the tomatoes
grown at different temperatures.
(4 marks)
(iii) Comment on why there might be a
difference between maximum rate
of photosynthesis and optimum
economic rate of photosynthesis.
(3 marks)
(i) Suggest how leaves on the same plant
can be exposed to different conditions
that might affect leaf development.
(2 marks)
(ii) State which curve in the diagram is
most adapted to photosynthesis in
direct sunlight.
(1 mark)
(iii) Describe, making reference to cells,
leaves and whole plants, how plants
can be adapted to different light
conditions.
(5 marks)
478
17
17.3 Photosynthesis
The light harvesting system and reaction centre are collectively known
as a photosystem.
accessoryaccessory hiamant
ccessory
pigmont accessory
antennae complex
accessory Yaccessory Lessory
accessd pi
reaction centre 1/gment
pigmenN!
primary
(accesso pigment bresso
acce pigment pigment hent
pigm
Yaccessory
accessol pigment /cessory
pigment
Icoa pigment
pigment
Figure 3 The reaction centre
is surrounded by an antennae
complex, maximising the
absorption of light
Plants use sunscreen as well
pigments is pH-dependent, leading to a range of different
colours from red to purple.
Anthocyanins act as a sunscreen by absorbing blue-
green and ultraviolet light, thereby inhibiting the
destruction of chlorophyll.
In their role as pigments they help trees maximise
production towards the end of the growing season as the
weather changes in autumn.
The red/purple coloration of leaves is also thought
to camouflage leaves from herbivores blind to red
wavelengths.
Plants need light to photosynthesise but if sunlight is too
intense chlorophyll is destroyed. Chlorophyll has to be
continuously synthesised during the summer to maintain
the level needed to photosynthesise at the required
rate. Chlorophyll is not produced when there is little or
no sunlight - this is why areas of grass that have been
covered turn yellow.
Carotenoids are accessory pigments responsible for
the yellow/orange colours seen in plant leaves. Orange
carotene and yellow xanthophyll are two examples. These
colours are not normally seen because they are masked
by the green colour of chlorophyll. Carotenoids are not
broken down, unlike chlorophyll, in strong sunlight and
are present throughout the growing season.
The shorter days and cooler nights of autumn cause
changes in the pigment composition in leaves.
Chlorophylla is no longer produced and leaves turn
yellow/orange as we see the carotenoids.
Anthocyanin is a red/purple pigment formed from a
reaction between sugars and proteins present in cell
sap. It is produced when the concentration of sugars is
high. High light intensity also promotes the production of
anthocyanins.
Anthocyanin produces the red skin of apples and the
purple of black grapes. The colour of the anthocyanin
1 Suggest explanations for the following
observations:
a Apples are often red on one side and green on
the other.
b Leaves with more vibrant red colours are
seen during years when there has been lots
of sunlight and dry weather. When it has
been raining and overcast there will not be as
much red foliage present.
2 Suggest why the production of anthocyanins is
temperature-dependent.
468
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
leaf blade
upper
epidermis
SCOA
transparent
waterproof
cuticle
leaf stalk
upper
Umesophyll
à leaf structure
lower
mesophyll
xylem
cellulose cell wall
phloem
lower
epidermis
chloroplast
guard
0,CO2 stomatal
0
mitochondrion
cell
pore air space
b vertical section through a dicotyledonous leaf
-outer membrane
inner membrane
_thylakoid
vacuole
NAN
nucleus
mes
granum
TE
c mesophyll cell
stroma
d chloroplast structure
chlorophyll absorption sepectrum of visible light
thylakoid
intergranal
lamella
granum
100
absorbance/%
stroma
e grana and thylakoids
Figure 1 Leaf and chloroplast
structure
700
0 -
400 450 500 550 600 650
wavelength/nm
A Figure 2 Absorption spectra of chlorophyll showing that
red and blue light is absorbed and green light is reflected
Chlorophyll b, xanthophylls, and carotenoids are embedded in the
thylakoid membrane of the chloroplast. These and other proteins
and pigments form a light harvesting system (also known as an
antennae complex). The role of the system is to absorb, or harvest,
light energy of different wavelengths and transfer this energy
quickly and efficiently to the reaction centre. Chlorophyll a is
located in the reaction centre, which is where the reactions involved
in photosynthesis take place.
467
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
The leaves of flowering plants have the
ability to develop differently, depending on
environmental conditions such as the amount
of sun or shade a leaf receives.
A student carried out an investigation into
sun and shade leaves from different parts of
the same plant. Their observations and results
are shown in the table.
Cuticle
Type Number Mean no. of Mean
of leaf of leaves stomata per mm thickness
studied on lower surface of leaf (um)
sun 55
170
208
shade
92
93
thick
thin
(i) State the factor limiting the rate of
photosynthesis at A on the graph.
(1 mark)
(ii) Suggest one factor that may limit the
rate of photosynthesis at B. (1 mark)
(iii) Carbon dioxide is given off by the
plant when the light intensity is
lower than X.
Name the process that produces
carbon dioxide in the plant. (1 mark)
(iv) With reference to the graph, explain
the biochemical processes that are
occurring in the plant:
as light intensity increases from
0 (zero) to X.
at light intensity X.
at light intensities greater than X.
(3 marks)
(i) Name the products of the light-
dependent stage of photosynthesis.
(3 marks)
(ii) Paraquat is a weed killer. It binds
with electrons in photosystem I.
Suggest how paraquat results in the
death of a plant.
(2 marks)
OCR F214 2012
c
a Calculate the percentage difference in
the mean thickness of the sun leaves
compared to the shade leaves.
Show your working.
(2 marks)
Suggest and explain one benefit of the
greater mean number of stomata per mm
on the lower surface of the sun leaves.
(2 marks)
Describe two ways in which the student
could improve her investigation. (2 marks)
OCR F214 2011
One way to determine the rate of
photosynthesis is to measure the uptake of
carbon dioxide.
a Discuss why measuring carbon dioxide
uptake may or may not give a better
indication of photosynthetic activity than
measuring oxygen production. (2 marks)
The graph shows the relationship between
light intensity and the relative carbon
dioxide uptake and production in a plant.
4
b
carbon dioxide
uptake
0 +
0,1
carbon dioxide' x
produced
light intensity
479
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Oxygen gas is released as a by-product. The protons are released into
the lumen of the thylakoids, increasing the proton concentration across
the membrane. As they move back through the membrane down a
concentration and electrochemical gradient, they drive the formation
of more ATP. Once the hydrogen ions are returned to the stroma, they
combine with NADP and an electron from PSI to form reduced NADP.
This is used in the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis. This
process removes hydrogen ions from the stroma so it helps to maintain
the proton gradient across the thylakoid membranes.
Sun
Cyclic photophosphorylation
The electrons leaving the electron transport chain after PSI can be
returned to PSI, instead of being used to form reduced NADP, leading
to cyclic photophosphorylation. This means PSI can still lead to
the production of ATP without any electrons being supplied from PSII.
Reduced NADP is not produced when this happens.
electron
transport
chain
PSI
The light-independent stage of photosynthesis
The light-independent stage of photosynthesis takes place in the
stroma of chloroplasts and uses carbon dioxide as a raw material. The
products from the light-dependent stage - ATP and reduced NADP, are
also required. Organic molecules, like glucose, are produced in a series
of reactions collectively known as the Calvin cycle.
ATP
Figure 9 Cyclic photophosphorylation
CO2
Calvin cycle
Carbon dioxide enters the intercellular spaces
within the spongy mesophyll of leaves by diffusion
from the atmosphere through stomata. It diffuses
into cells and into the stroma of chloroplasts where
it is combined with a five-carbon molecule called
ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). The carbon in
carbon dioxide is therefore fixed, meaning that it
is incorporated into an organic molecule.
RuBisCo
unstable intermediate
RuBP
000 GP
The enzyme ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase
(RuBisCO) catalyses the reaction and an unstable
six-carbon intermediate is produced. RuBisCO
is the key enzyme in photosynthesis. It is a very
inefficient enzyme as it is competitively inhibited by
oxygen (see the Photorespiration application box)
so a lot of it is needed to carry out photosynthesis
successfully. Biologists estimate that it is probably
the most abundant enzyme in the world.
000 GP
OTP
ATP
The unstable six-carbon compound formed
immediately breaks down, forming two three-
carbon glycerate 3-phosphate (GP) molecules.
OTP
reduced NADP
lipids
glucose
amino acids
Each GP molecule is converted to another three-
carbon molecule, triose phosphate (TP), using
a hydrogen atom from reduced NADP and energy
supplied by ATP, both supplied from the light-
dependent reactions of photosynthesis.
Figure 10 The Calvin cycle
471
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Synoptic link
In photosynthesis, ATP is used to synthesise glucose and other organic
molecules. The ATP produced in respiration provides the energy
needed by metabolic processes and reactions essential to life.
A simple way of modelling this process is to think of the flow of
water through a hydroelectric power station causing turbines to spin,
generating electricity. Both chemiosmosis and hydroelectric power
generation result in energy in a very useable form.
You learnt about diffusion and
active transport across cell
membranes in Chapter 5, Plasma
membranes.
The processes of oxidative phosphorylation (in respiration)
and photophosphorylation (in photosynthesis) are also vital in
chemiosmosis. You will learn about these in more detail in Topic
18.4, Oxidative phosphorylation and Topic 17.3, Photosynthesis,
respectively.
Summary questions
1 Explain the importance of ATP to living organisms.
(3 marks)
2 Describe the properties of cell membranes necessary for the
formation of a proton gradient.
(5 marks)
3 Name the type of diffusion which enables protons to move through
ATP synthase and explain the role of ATP synthase in the
production of ATP.
(4 marks)
4 The synthesis and breakdown of ATP is an example of a reversible
reaction:
ADP+P = ATP
ATPase is often the name given to the enzyme which hydrolyses
ATP, producing ADP and P, ATPase and ATP synthase are, in fact,
the same enzyme. Explain how this is possible.
(5 marks)
465
17.3 Photosynthesis
Specification reference: 5.2.1
Photosynthesis is the process by which energy, in the form of light
from the Sun, is used to build complex organic molecules, such as
glucose. Light energy is transformed into chemical energy trapped
in the bonds of the complex organic molecules produced. Organisms
that can photosynthesise, like plants and algae, are said to be
autotrophic.
+bo HAL
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the structure of a chloroplast
and the sites of the two main
stages of photosynthesis
► the importance of
photosynthetic pigments in
photosynthesis
the light-dependent stage of
photosynthesis
the fixation of carbon dioxide
and the light-independent
stage of photosynthesis
→ the uses of triose
phosphate (TP)
→ practical investigations using
thick layer chromatography
to separate photosynthetic
pigments.
Heterotrophic organisms, like animals, obtain complex organic
molecules by eating other (heterotrophic and/or autotrophic)
organisms.
Both autotrophic and heterotrophic organisms then break down complex
organic molecules during the process of respiration to release the energy
they need to drive metabolic processes.
Photosynthesis can be summarised by the equation:
6CO2 + 6H2O + CH,206 + 60,
carbon dioxide + water → glucose + oxygen
Structure and function of chloroplasts
As you have learnt, photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts. The
network of membranes present within chloroplasts provides a large
surface area to maximise the absorption of light essential in the first step
of photosynthesis. The membranes form flattened sacs called thylakoids
which are stacked to form grana (singular granum) (Figure 1). The
grana are joined by membranous channels called lamellae.
Synoptic link
Light is absorbed by complexes of pigments, such as chlorophyll,
which are embedded within the thylakoid membranes.
You will learn more about how
respiration releases energy in
Chapter 18, Respiration.
The fluid enclosed in the chloroplast is called the stroma and is the site
of the many chemical reactions resulting in the formation of complex
organic molecules.
Synoptic link
You learnt about endosymbiosis
in Topic 2.6, Prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells.
Chlorophyll
Pigment molecules absorb specific wavelengths (colours) of light
and reflect others. Different pigments absorb and reflect different
wavelengths and this is why they have different colours. The primary
pigment in photosynthesis is chlorophyll. Chlorophyll absorbs mainly
red and blue light and reflects green light. The presence of large
quantities of chlorophyll is the reason for the familiar green colour
of plants.
Although there are a number of different pigments that absorb
light, the primary pigment is chlorophyll a. Other pigments, like
chlorophyll b, xanthophylls, and carotenoids absorb different
wavelengths of light than those absorbed by chlorophyll a. Different
combinations of pigments are the reason for the different shades
and colours of leaves.
466
17
17.3 Photosynthesis
Triose phosphate is a carbohydrate, a three-carbon sugar, the majority
of which is recycled to regenerate RuBP so that the Calvin cycle can
continue. It is the starting point for the synthesis of many complex
biological molecules, including other carbohydrates, lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids.
The Calvin cycle can be summarised in three steps:
•
Fixation - carbon dioxide is fixed (incorporated into an organic
molecule) in the first step.
Reduction - GP is reduced to TP by the addition of hydrogen from
reduced NADP using energy supplied by ATP.
Regeneration - RuBP is regenerated from the recycled TP.
Study tip
Reduced NADP must supply a
hydrogen atom to GP in the Calvin
cycle, not a hydrogen ion or proton.
If there is no electron present a bond
will not be formed with carbon.
Regeneration of RuBP
For one glucose molecule to be produced six carbon dioxide molecules
have to enter the Calvin cycle, resulting in six full turns of the cycle.
This will result in the production of 12 TP molecules, two of which
will be removed to make the glucose molecule.
This means that 10 TP molecules are recycled to regenerate six RuBP
molecules (used in the six turns of the cycle).
Synoptic link
10 x three-carbon TP = 30 carbons 'shuffled' gives 6 x five-carbon
RuBP = 30 carbons
You learnt about transpiration in
Topic 9.3, Transpiration.
Energy is supplied by ATP for the reactions involved in the
regeneration of RuBP.
Photorespiration
Oxygen is a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme
RuBisCO, leading to the production of phosphoglycolate
and reducing the production of GP. This only happens
when the concentration of carbon dioxide becomes
very low.
Stomata need to be open for plants to obtain carbon
dioxide for photosynthesis. Water vapour leaves plants
through open stomata by the process of transpiration.
When the temperature is high and humidity of the
atmosphere is low plants can lose too much water. To
prevent excess water loss, stomata close.
This prevents the entry of carbon dioxide into the leaves of
the plant. The plant will still be photosynthesising and so
the carbon dioxide levels fall and the oxygen levels increase.
3-phosphoglycolate
2-phosphoglycolate
Phosphoglycolate is a toxic two-carbon molecule that
needs to be removed. It is converted by the plant into
other organic molecules and energy from ATP is needed
for the conversion.
RuBisCO has a higher affinity for carbon dioxide than
oxygen and approximately 25% of the products of the
Calvin cycle are lost in photorespiration, reducing the
efficiency of photosynthesis.
RuBisCO
ribulose-1,5-
bienhagobate
photosynthesis
pndturespiratIuII
www.
1 Explain why photorespiration is not something
commercial producers would want to encourage.
2 Suggest why plants evolved with such an
important enzyme as RuBisCO being
inhibited by such a common molecule as oxygen.
CO2
A Figure 11 Photorespiration - RuBisCO and two substrates
472
17
17.2 ATP synthesis
Electron transport chain
An electron transport chain is made up of a series of electron
carriers, each with progressively lower energy levels. As high energy
electrons move from one carrier in the chain to another, energy is
released. This is used to pump protons across a membrane, creating
a concentration difference across the membrane and therefore a
proton gradient. The proton gradient is maintained as a result of the
impermeability of the membrane to hydrogen ions.
high proton concentration
high energy
electron
electron
carrier
electron
carrier
membrane
electron
carrier
electron
carrier
...
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
--
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
low energy
7 electron
low proton concentration
Figure 2 The flow of electrons along an electron transport chain releases energy which is used to pump
protons across a membrane, resulting in the formation of a proton gradient
The only way the protons can move back through the membrane down
their concentration gradient is through hydrophilic membrane channels
linked to the enzyme ATP synthase (catalyses the formation of ATP).
The flow of protons through these channels provides the energy used to
synthesise ATP (from ADP and P:).
high proton concentration
membrane
ADP
ADP
ATP
low proton concentration
A Figure 3 The role of ATP synthase in the synthesis of ATP from ADP and P
464
17
17.3 Photosynthesis
Synoptic link
You learnt about coenzymes in
Topic 4.4, Cofactors, coenzymes,
and prosthetic groups.
Study tip
The coenzyme used in
photosynthesis is NADP, this is not
the same coenzyme as NAD, used
in respiration.
The light-dependent stage of photosynthesis
Non-cyclic photophosphorylation
Two photosystems are involved in non-cyclic photophosphorylation,
photosystem II (PSII) followed by photosystem I (PSI). The reaction
centre of PSI absorbs light at a higher wavelength (700 nm) than PSII
(680 nm). The light absorbed excites electrons at the reaction centres of
the photosystems.
The excited electrons are released from the reaction centre of PSII
and are passed to an electron transport chain. ATP is produced by the
process of chemiosmosis (Topic 17.2, ATP synthesis).
The electrons lost from the reaction centre at PSII are replaced from
water molecules broken down using energy from the Sun (Topic 17.4,
Factors affecting photosynthesis).
Sun
Excited electrons are released from the reaction centre at PSI, passed
to another electron transport chain, and ATP is again produced by
chemiosmosis. The electrons lost from this reaction centre are replaced
by electrons that have just
travelled along the first
electron transport chain after
being released from PSII.
Sun
electron
electron
transport
The electrons leaving the
transport
chain
electron transport chain
chain
following PSI are accepted,
along with a hydrogen ion,
PSI
by the coenzyme NADP,
PSII
forming reduced NADP.
reduced
NADP
Reduced NADP provides the
hydrogen or reducing power
ATP
in the production of organic
molecules, such as glucose, in
A Figure 7 Diagram summarising the two electron transport chains involved in cyclic
the light-independent stage
and non-cyclic photophosphorylation, this is often referred to as the Z-scheme
which follows.
Photolysis
Sun
Water molecules are split into hydrogen ions, electrons,
and oxygen molecules using energy from the Sun in a
process called photolysis. The electrons released replace the
electrons lost from the reaction centre of PSII. This is why
water, along with light and carbon dioxide, is a raw material
electron
H20
deficient
of photosynthesis.
PSIL
The oxygen-evolving complex which forms part of PSII is
an enzyme that catalyses the breakdown of water. Here
water molecules are split into hydrogen ions, electrons,
and oxygen molecules using energy from the Sun in a
Figure 8 Photolysis which is catalysed by the process called photolysis. The electrons released replace
oxygen-evolving complex present in PSII
the electrons lost from the reaction centre of PSII. This is
why water, along with light and carbon dioxide, is a raw material of
photosynthesis. The photolysis reaction is summarised as:
H,
0 2H+ + 2e +10,
470
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
0 List the apparatus you would use and
outline the procedure you would follow
to separate a mixture of plant pigments.
solvent front
carotene
Investigating photosynthetic pigments
Chromatography can be used to separate the different
pigments in a plant extract. The mobile phase would
be the solution containing a mixture of pigments and
the stationary phase a thin layer of silica gel applied
to glass.
The different solubilities of the pigments in the mobile
phase, and their differing interactions with the stationary
phase, lead to them moving at different rates. This results
in the pigments being separated as they move through
the silica gel.
The retention value (R) for each pigment can be
calculated using the formula:
pheophytin
chlorophyll A
chlorophyll b
R =
distance travelled by component
distance travelled by solvent
carotenoids
starting point
Synoptic link
You also learnt about
chromatography and how it is used
to separate amino acids in solution
in Topic 3.6, Structure of proteins.
Figure 4 Thin layer chromatogram (TLC) of an extract
of thylakoid membranes from the leaf of annual meadow
grass. A drop of extract was laid at the bottom of the
sheet. The sheet was then placed in a beaker of solvent
separating out the pigments. Five bands can be seen.
2 Calculate the R value for each pigment.
H.0
The two stages of photosynthesis
There are two stages in photosynthesis:
reduced NADP
Sun
light-
dependent
reactions
ATP
Light-dependent stage - energy from sunlight
is absorbed and used to form ATP (Figure 5).
Hydrogen from water is used to reduce coenzyme
NADP to reduced NADP.
Light-independent stage - hydrogen from reduced
NADP and carbon dioxide is used to build organic
molecules, such as glucose. ATP supplies the
required energy (Figure 6).
02
CO2
light-dependent stage
lipids
Figure 5 Summary of the light-dependent stage of
photosynthesis which occurs within and across the thylakoid
membranes
reduced NADP
light-
independent
reactions
glucose
ATP
amino acids
light-independent stage
Figure 6 Summary of the light-independent
stage of photosynthesis which occurs in the stroma
469
17.2 ATP synthesis
Specification reference: 5.2.2
ATP production
As you have already learnt, ATP is the universal energy currency in
cells. The bond energy in the ATP molecule is used to drive essential
metabolic processes. The production of ATP is therefore fundamental
to all forms of life.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the chemiosmotic theory.
In photosynthesis, light provides the energy needed to build organic
molecules like glucose. This energy is used to form chemical bonds
in ATP, which are then broken to release the energy needed to make
bonds as glucose is formed.
In respiration organic molecules, such as glucose, are broken down
and the energy released is used to synthesise ATP. This ATP is then
used to supply the energy needed to break bonds in the metabolic
reactions of the cell.
Synthesis of ATP is therefore a crucial step in both respiration and
photosynthesis.
energy
(Sun)
ATP
large organic
molecules
(glucose)
ATP
energy-
requiring
reactions and
processes
(essential to life)
photosynthesis
respiration
A Figure 1 The role of ATP in energy transfer
Chemiosmosis
The ATP produced in both photosynthesis and respiration
is synthesised primarily by a process called chemiosmosis.
Chemiosmosis involves the diffusion of protons from a region of high
concentration to a region of low concentration through a partially
permeable membrane. The movement of the protons as they flow
down their concentration gradient releases energy that is used in the
attachment of an inorganic phosphate (P) to ADP, forming ATP.
Synoptic link
You learnt about ATP-ADP in
Topic 3.11, ATP.
Chemiosmosis depends on the creation of a proton concentration
gradient. The energy to do this comes from high-energy electrons
(excited electrons).
Excited electrons
Electrons are raised to higher energy levels, or excited, in two ways:
electrons present in pigment molecules (e.g., chlorophyll) are
excited by absorbing light from the Sun
high energy electrons are released when chemical bonds are
broken in respiratory substrate molecules (e.g., glucose).
The excited electrons pass into an electron transport chain and are
used to generate a proton gradient.
463
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Summary of photosynthesis
The light-dependent stage, including photolysis, and the light-
independent stage are summarised in Figure 12 showing how energy
from the Sun in the form of light is used to build the chemical bonds
in complex biological molecules.
H2O
CO2
photolysis
carbon fixation
lipids
reduced NADP
light-
dependent
reactions
light-
independent
reactions
Sun
triose phosphate
glucose
P
ATP
amino acids
02
light-dependent stage
light-independent stage
A Figure 12 Overview of the light-dependent and light-independent stages
b
carotenoid
chlorophyll a
relative absorption →
chlorophyll b
Summary questions
1 Explain the meaning of the term photophosphorylation. (2 marks)
2 Look at Figure 13. Explain why the absorption spectra
of the pigments present in the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts
(top graph) follows the same pattern as the action spectrum (the rate of
photosynthesis at different wavelengths of light, (bottom graph)).
(4 marks)
3 Explain why photosynthesis stops when plants are exposed to
green light only.
(3 marks)
4 Explain what is meant by the term fixation.
(2 marks)
400
violet
500
blue green
600 700
yellow orange red
relative effectiveness
in photosynthesis →
400
violet
500 600 700
blue green yellow orange red
wavelength / nm
A Figure 13
5 a The Calvin cycle used to be called the 'dark reaction'.
This term is now rarely used.
Explain why this term is incorrect.
(1 mark)
b Explain why the alternate name of the Calvin cycle, the
light-independent stage, is also not completely accurate. (3 marks)
6 Suggest the possible benefits of cyclic photophosphorylation. (4 marks)
7 Describe how RuBP is regenerated from TP in the
Calvin cycle.
(4 marks)
8 The overall reaction for photosynthesis is summarised
by the chemical equation:
6CO2 +6H,0 → CH4206+60,
Outline why this is an oversimplification.
(6 marks)
473
17.4 Factors affecting photosynthesis
Specification reference: 5.2.1
Photosynthesis is a multi-step reaction pathway that takes place in
plants. Like any other chemical reaction, it is affected by various
environmental factors. Plants are affected by changes in temperature
and the availability of raw materials required for photosynthesis.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ factors affecting
photosynthesis and
investigations of these
factors.
Plants obtain carbon dioxide through open stomata but this also
involves the loss of water by transpiration. However, the loss of water
vapour results in the transport of important ions and minerals from
the soil to the leaves.
A balance between these different processes has to be maintained and
this can be upset by changes in the environment of the plant.
Synoptic link
You learnt about transport in plants Limiting factors
and water loss by transpiration
When one of the factors needed for a plant to photosynthesise is in
in Chapter 9, Transport in plants.
short supply, it reduces the rate of photosynthesis, and is therefore a
In this chapter in Topic 9.5, Plant
limiting factor.
adaptations to water loss you learnt
about the mechanism of stomatal The factors that affect the rate of photosynthesis are:
opening and closing and plant
Light intensity - light is needed as an energy source. As light intensity
adaptations to dry environments
increases, ATP and reduced NADP are produced at a higher rate.
(xerophytes).
Carbon dioxide concentration - carbon dioxide is needed as a source
of carbon, so if all other conditions are met, increasing the carbon
dioxide concentration increases the rate of carbon fixation in the
Calvin cycle and, therefore, the rate of TP production.
Temperature - affects the rate of enzyme-controlled reactions.
As temperature increases, the rate of enzyme activity increases
until the point at which the proteins denature. An increase
in temperature increases the rates of the enzyme-controlled
reactions in photosynthesis, such as carbon fixation. The rate of
photorespiration, however, also increases above
25°C meaning higher photosynthetic rates may not
higher Co, concentration
higher temperature.
be seen at higher temperatures even if enzymes are
not actually denatured.
higher CO, concentration
lower temperature. Stomata on plant leaves and other surfaces will
lower CO2 concentration
close to avoid water loss by transpiration during
lower temperature. dry spells when plants undergo water stress. The
closure of stomata stops the diffusion of carbon
A intensity of light
dioxide into the plant, reducing the rate of the
light-independent reaction, and eventually
A Figure 1 Following the blue line from A, rate of photosynthesis
stopping photosynthesis.
increases with increasing light intensity meaning light is the
limiting factor. This happens until carbon dioxide concentration Although water is required for photosynthesis it
becomes limiting. Increasing the light intensity will then no longer is never considered a limiting factor because for
have an effect until carbon dioxide concentration is increased
water potential to have become low enough to
limit the rate of photosynthesis the plant will already have closed
its stomata and ceased photosynthesis. Plants, except those with
rate of photosynthesis
474
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL
PROCESSES
17.1 Energy cycles
Specification reference: 5.2.1 and 5.2.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the need for cellular respiration
► the interrelationship
between the processes
of photosynthesis and
respiration.
The need for energy
Living organisms have to be active to survive. Organisms grow,
respond to changes in their environment, and deal with threats from
other organisms. They have to find or make food, and reproduce.
All of this activity depends on metabolic reactions and processes
continually taking place in individual cells.
A few examples of these metabolic activities amongst many include:
Synoptic link
You learnt about active transport in
Topic 5.4, Active transport.
active transport, which is essential for the uptake of nitrates by
root hair cells, loading sucrose into sieve tube cells, the selective
reabsorption of glucose and amino acids in the kidney, and the
conduction of nerve impulses
anabolic reactions, such as the building of polymers like proteins,
polysaccharides, and nucleic acids essential for growth and repair
movement brought about by cilia, flagella, or the contractile
filaments in muscle cells.
Synoptic link
All of these metabolic activities require energy.
You will learn more about the
transfer of energy through
ecosystems in Topic 23.2, Biomass
transfer through an ecosystem.
Energy flow through living organisms
The total amount of energy in the universe hasn't changed from
the time of the Big Bang, when the universe began, until now. The
universe is gradually cooling as it expands because this energy is being
dispersed over a larger area. This is inevitable and irreversible. Energy
cannot be created or destroyed.
Synoptic link
producers
decomposers
You learnt about glucose as
an energy store in Topic 3.3,
Carbohydrates, and about ATP as a
molecule of energy in Topic 3.11, ATP.
consumers
Sun
high energy photosynthesis
radiation
respiration
respiration
respiration
Study tip
A glucose molecule contains more
energy than the single metabolic
reactions needed to break it down.
The energy contained within
a glucose molecule is used to
synthesise many molecules of
ATP, and it is molecules of ATP that
drive metabolic reactions.
heat
low energy radiation
A Figure 1 Transfer of energy through ecosystems
460
17
17.4 Factors affecting photosynthesis
concentration
The effect of reducing light intensity
on the Calvin cycle
- GP
Reducing light intensity will reduce the rate of the
light-dependent stage of photosynthesis. This will
reduce the quantity of ATP and reduced NADP
- RuBP
produced. ATP and reduced NADP are needed to
convert GP to TP. The concentration of GP will
therefore increase and the concentration of TP will
decrease. As there will be less TP to regenerate
high
low
high
RuBP, the concentration of RuBP will also decrease.
light intensity
The reverse will happen when the light intensity is
A Figure 4 The effect of light intensity on GP,
increased (Figure 4).
TP, and RuBP concentrations
The effect of carbon dioxide concentration and
temperature on the Calvin cycle
All the reactions making up the Calvin cycle are catalysed by
enzymes, for example, RuBisCO in carbon fixation. At lower
temperatures enzyme and substrate molecules have less kinetic
energy resulting in fewer successful collisions and a reduced rate
of reaction. This means decreasing temperature results in lower
concentrations of GP, TP, and RuBP.
The same effect will be seen at high temperatures as enzymes will be
denatured - this is irreversible.
As carbon dioxide is an essential substrate of the Calvin cycle, low
concentrations will lead to reduced concentrations of GP (as there is
less carbon dioxide to be fixed) and TP. The concentration of RuBP will
increase as it is still being formed from TP but not being used to fix
carbon dioxide.
Artificial photosynthesis, a win-win solution
Photosynthesis would appear to offer a solution. It uses
carbon dioxide and energy from the Sun to produce
carbohydrates. Carbohydrates can be used as both food
and fuel.
The burning of fossil fuels, and respiration, is continually
releasing huge quantities of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere. The overall concentration of carbon dioxide,
a greenhouse gas, is increasingly leading to more heat
from the Sun being trapped in the atmosphere. This is
enhanced global warming and is causing the polar ice
caps to melt, increasing sea levels, and changing the
climate around the world.
It is said that 'more energy hits Earth from the Sun in one
hour than mankind uses in an entire year', so there is no
shortage of energy. We already collect and use energy
from the Sun in the form of solar power but the Sun doesn't
always shine and at the moment there are no practical ways
to store energy for a 'rainy day'. However, the carbohydrate
fuel produced by plants can be stored for long periods.
Fossil fuels have a limited supply and will eventually
run out, leading to fuel shortages, and many parts of the
world already suffer from food shortages.
Therefore, we have a surplus of carbon dioxide, which needs
removing, and a shortage of fuel and food, both of which are
forms of biomass produced by plants using carbon dioxide.
The problem is that the process of photosynthesis, which
has taken millions of years to evolve, is still not particularly
efficient, so relying on plants is not the answer.
476
17
17.1 Energy cycles
Organic molecules contain large numbers of carbon-hydrogen bonds,
particularly lipids. Carbon and hydrogen share the electrons almost
equally in bonds that form between them. This results in a non-polar
bond which does not require a lot of energy to break. The carbon
and hydrogen released then form strong bonds with oxygen atoms,
forming carbon dioxide and water, resulting in the release of large
quantities of energy. The reverse happens in photosynthesis when
organic molecules are made from small inorganic molecules. The
energy required to build these molecules comes from the Sun.
Energy transfer
1 Copy and complete the table.
When thinking about energy transfer:
Bond energy = energy required to break bond =
energy required to form bond.
Bond
Number of
bonds involved
in reaction
Bond
energy
(kJ/mol)
Total
(kJ/mol)
The overall reaction that takes place in photosynthesis is:
803
6CO2 + 6H,0 CH206+60,
The overall reaction that takes place in respiration is the
reverse of this reaction.
464
0-H
C-H
C-C
414
347
The structures of the molecules involved are shown in
Figure 2.
358
H
0–0
495
H-C-0-H
O=
0
HC-OH
I/
0-HH
H-OV_16-H
2 Using information from the completed table,
calculate how much energy is required to make one
mole of glucose from six moles of carbon dioxide
and six moles of water.
3 State how much energy would be released when one
mole of glucose is respired.
The breakdown of one glucose molecule results
in the production of 38 molecules of ATP. The
formation of ATP requires 30.6 kJ/mol. Calculate the
percentage of energy released when one mole of
glucose is respired.
H
0-H
Figure 2
Summary questions
1 Explain why it is incorrect to say that energy is produced.
(2 marks)
2 Explain why ATP is not a good energy storage molecule but
why organic molecules, like lipids or carbohydrates, are.
(4 marks)
3 Explain the interrelationship between respiration and
photosynthesis in organisms.
(5 marks)
462
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Radiation from the Sun is used to fuel the metabolic reactions and
processes necessary to keep organisms alive before, eventually, being
transferred back to the atmosphere as heat (Figure 1).
Photosynthesis
Organisms make use of the energy in the bonds of organic molecules,
such as glucose. These bonds are formed during photosynthesis in
plants and other photosynthetic organisms (Topic 17.3, Photosynthesis).
Light is trapped by chlorophyll molecules. This energy is used to drive
the synthesis of glucose from carbon dioxide and water.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about respiration
in Chapter 18, Respiration.
Table 1 Comparison of respiration
and photosynthesis
Respiration
All organisms need to respire. Respiration is the process by which
organic molecules, such as glucose, are broken down into smaller
inorganic molecules, like carbon dioxide and water. The energy
stored within the bonds of the organic molecules is used to synthesise
adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Two of the most important chemical reactions in the living world are
photosynthesis and respiration. Photosynthesis is the reaction behind
the production of most of the biomass on the earth. Respiration is the
process by which organisms break down biomass to provide the ATP
needed to drive the metabolic reactions that take place in cells.
The two reactions are intimately linked (Table 1). The raw materials for
one are the products of the other so they are interrelated throughout
the living world. The overall reactions for the two are as follows:
Photosynthesis
Respiration
6CO2 + 6H,0 CH206 +602 CH206 +60, 600, +61,0
Respiration Photosynthesis
Reactants
glucose water and
and oxygen carbon dioxide
water and
glucose and
carbon
oxygen
dioxide
Products
Purpose
release
energy
trap energy
The importance of carbon-hydrogen bonds
A general rule in biochemistry is that energy is used to break bonds,
and energy is released when bonds are formed. The same quantity
of energy is involved whether a particular bond is being broken or
formed. This is called the bond energy. Whether an overall reaction
is exothermic (releases energy) or endothermic (takes in energy)
depends on the total number and strength of bonds that are broken or
formed during the reaction.
Study tip
It is important to remember that
energy is not produced, created,
made, or lost. Say instead that
energy is released or absorbed, or
transferred as heat.
The atoms in small inorganic molecules like water and carbon dioxide
are joined by strong bonds that release a lot of energy when they form
but require a lot of energy to break. Organic molecules like glucose
and amino acids contain many more bonds than small inorganic
molecules. These are weaker bonds compared with those in inorganic
molecules and, therefore, release less energy when they form and
require less energy to be broken.
In respiration large organic molecules are broken down forming small
inorganic molecules. The total energy required to break all the bonds in
a complex organic molecule is less than the total energy released in the
formation of all the bonds in the smaller inorganic products. The excess
energy released by the formation of the bonds is used to synthesise ATP.
461
17
ENERGY FOR BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
adaptations to tolerate drought conditions, are unlikely to survive
these conditions.
The law of limiting factors states that the rate of a physiological process
will be limited by the factor which is in shortest supply.
Investigating the factors that affect the rate of photosynthesis
dissolved oxygen/%
Data loggers are electronic devices that
record data over time using sensors. Physical
interface
properties are recorded such as light
oxygen sensor
intensity, temperature, pressure, pH (which
can be used as a measure of carbon dioxide
concentration), and humidity. Readings
light sensor
can be displayed in graphical form or on a
spreadsheet.
plant
They are usually equipped with a
computer
microprocessor (which inputs digital data)
and internal memory for data storage. Data A Figure 2 The plant is supplied with carbon dioxide from sodium
loggers can usually interface with a computer hydrogen carbonate in the solution containing the pond weed
using specialised software.
Readings are taken with high degrees of
accuracy and can be taken over long periods
of time. They can be set to take many
readings in a short period of time or used
when there is a risk involved, for example,
extreme cold or heat.
The factors affecting rate of photosynthesis
can be investigated using a live pond weed,
such as Elodea. The rate of photosynthesis
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
can be estimated by calculating the rate of
time/mins
oxygen produced, carbon dioxide used, or
Figure 3 Shows an example of a graph produced using the apparatus
increase in dry mass of a plant.
described
Apparatus could be set up as shown in Figure 2.
Sodium hydrogen carbonate would be used to provide
1 Use the graph to calculate the rate of oxygen
carbon dioxide. The pond weed should be kept illuminated
production after point A.
before use. The apparatus should be left to equilibrate for
2 Suggest what happened at point A.
10 minutes or so before readings are taken. The oxygen
3 Outline how you could use the apparatus to
sensor may also need to be calibrated using the oxygen
investigate the effects of changing light intensity,
concentration of air (21%).
temperature, and carbon dioxide concentration
on the rate of photosynthesis.
The software can be set to take readings at desired
Elodea will release bubbles of oxygen when
intervals for the required length of time.
photosynthesising which can be counted
and used as an estimate of the rate of
photosynthesis.
Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages
of this method and of using data loggers in
estimating the rate of photosynthesis.
475
