14.4 Diabetes and its control
Specification reference: 5.1.4
To keep blood glucose concentration constant the body relies on
the interaction between glucagon and insulin. However, for over
300 million people in the world this system of regulation does not
work properly. They suffer from the chronic disease, diabetes mellitus
(usually referred to as diabetes). This means they are unable to
metabolise carbohydrates properly, in particular glucose.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the differences between type
1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus
→ the potential treatments for
diabetes mellitus.
Types of diabetes
If you suffer from diabetes your pancreas either does not produce
enough insulin, or your body cannot effectively respond to the insulin
produced. This means that blood glucose concentration remains
high. Hyperglycaemia, or raised blood sugar, is a common effect
of uncontrolled diabetes. Over time this can lead to serious damage
of many body systems, especially the nerves and blood vessels.
Table 1 Symptoms of diabetes
Common symptoms of diabetes
There are two main types of diabetes:
High blood glucose
concentration
Glucose present in urine
Excessive need to urinate
(polyuria)
Excessive thirst (polydipsia)
Constant hunger
Weight loss
Blurred vision
Tiredness
Type 1 diabetes. Patients with type 1 diabetes are unable to
produce insulin. The B cells in the islets of Langerhans do not
produce insulin. The cause of type 1 diabetes is not known and
so, at the moment, the disease cannot be prevented or cured. It is
possible, however, to treat the symptoms. Evidence suggests that
in many cases the condition arises as a result of an autoimmune
response where the body's own immune system attacks the B cells.
This condition normally begins in childhood, and people develop
symptoms of the disease quickly.
Type 2 diabetes. Patients with type 2 diabetes cannot effectively
use insulin and control their blood sugar levels. This is either
because the person's B cells do not produce enough insulin
or the person's body cells do not respond properly to insulin.
This is often because the glycoprotein insulin receptor on the
cell membrane does not work properly. The cells lose their
responsiveness to insulin, and therefore do not take up enough
glucose, leaving it in the bloodstream. Globally, approximately
90% of people with diabetes have type 2 diabetes. This is
largely as a result of excess body weight, physical inactivity,
and habitual, excessive overeating of (refined) carbohydrates.
Symptoms are similar to those of type 1 diabetes, but are often
less severe and develop slowly. As a result, the disease is often
only diagnosed after complications have already arisen. Risk of
type 2 diabetes increases with age. Until recently, this type of
diabetes was seen only in adults (normally over the age of 40),
but it is now also occurring in children.
Figure 1 People with diabetes have
to measure their blood glucose levels
regularly. This is normally done using
a finger prick test
393
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
14
Histology of the pancreas
When viewed under a microscope, you can clearly see the differences
between endocrine and exocrine pancreatic tissue. The main
differences are summarised in Table 1.
Table 1
Structure
Appearance
Shape
Type of tissue
Function
islets of Langerhans
lightly stained
large, spherical
clusters
endocrine
pancreas
produce and secrete
hormones
pancreatic acini
(singular - acinus)
small, berry.
like clusters
exocrine
pancreas
produce and secrete
digestive enzymes
Islets of Langerhans
Within the islets of Langerhans are
different types of cell. They are classified
according to the hormone they secrete:
a (alpha) cells - these produce and
secrete glucagon
B (beta) cells - these produce and
secrete insulin
Alpha cells are larger and more numerous
than beta cells within an islet.
Using standard staining techniques,
it is often very difficult to distinguish
between the cell types within an islet of
Langerhans. In Figure 2, a differential
stain has been used. The B cells of the
islets that produce insulin are stained
blue, and the a cells that produce
glucagon are stained pink.
Figure 2 Light micrograph of a section through the pancreas. The islet of
Langerhans (centre right) is composed of groups of secretory cells. The main
secretions from these cells are the hormones insulin and glucagon, which
control blood sugar. These cells are endocrine - their secretions go straight
into the bloodstream. The cells surrounding the islet are packed into secretory
acini (pink) which secrete digestive enzymes. This part of the pancreas is
exocrine - the enzymes pass straight out into the gut, via ducts. The structure
on the left is a branch of the pancreatic duct, 195 magnification
A Figure 3 Islet of Langerhan cell in human pancreas, *300 magnification
387
14
14.2 Structure and function of the pancreas
Histology of the pancreas
The following activity will allow you to view the structures within the pancreas.
blood vessel
- connective tissue
acinus
(plural - acini)
www
A Figure 4 A colour transmission electron
micrograph of a pancreatic alpha cell.
Alpha cells make up 15-20% of the cells
in the islets of Langerhans. They produce
glucagon, a hormone that regulates blood
sugar levels by increasing the amount
of glucose available. The glucagon is
carried into the bloodstream by granules
(dark red). The nucleus (round, blue) and
mitochondria (brown) can also be seen,
*5000 magnification
duct which leads
to pancreatic duct
islet of Langerhans
capillaries into which
hormones are secreted
-cells (secrete insulin)
cells (secrete glucagon)
Figure 5 Cross-section of pancreatic material, as viewed through a light
microscope
Summary questions
1 State the difference between
endocrine and exocrine
glandular tissue. (1 mark)
2 State two features which would
enable you to identify the
islets of Langerhans through
a cross-section of pancreatic
material, when viewed under a
light microscope.
Place a stained slide of pancreatic tissue on the stage of a light microscope.
Begin by viewing under low power. Compare this with Figure 5 - can you
identify the following structures?
a Exocrine tissue, which secretes digestive enzymes
b Blood vessels
c Branches of the pancreatic duct.
Select one of the groups of exocrine cells and view under high power. You will
be viewing an acinus - can you identify the following features?
d Small group of cells formed in a cluster
e Clearly visible nuclei within these cells
f Central duct (which leads to the pancreatic duct).
Make a scientific drawing of an acinus. Remember to include a scale on your
drawing and label all of the key features.
Return to low power and look for small groups of cells which look different to
the rest of the material. These are the islets of Langerhans. These groups of
cells are likely to appear lighter than the surrounding material.
View an islet of Langerhans under high power. Can you spot the following?
g Capillaries, which transport the secreted hormones
h a cells, which secrete glucagon
i B cells, which secrete insulin.
You may find that your slide has been prepared using a differential stain,
which colours the a and B cells differently to enable you to identify these
structures more readily.
3 00 Figure 6 shows
pancreatic tissue which
has been stained for insulin.
Areas which contain insulin
appear brown. Describe the
structure and function of the
pancreatic tissue shown on
this slide.
(6 marks)
Make a drawing of an islet of Langerhans. Remember to include a scale
on your drawing and label all of the key features.
Figure 6
388
14
14.4 Diabetes and its control
+
Type 2 diabetes me
scientific evidence has been used to inform decision-
making at a national level.
There has been a significant increase in the number
of cases of diabetes diagnosed in the UK, rising from
1.4 million in 1996 to around 3 million in 2014. It is
estimated that there may be as many as 5 million
sufferers of diabetes by 2025, with around 85% having
type 2 diabetes.
Discussion
A clear causal link has been established between obesity
and the onset of type 2 diabetes. This information has
been used to launch initiatives to promote healthy
eating and exercise. These include, for example, the
Change4Life campaign. This is an example of where
1 To what extent is a government responsible for the
health of its citizens?
2 What steps would you take to minimise the risk of
diabetes amongst the UK population?
3 Should universal benefits - for example, free
healthcare - be available to those whose lifestyle
choices cause the onset of a medical condition?
Study tip
Diabetes treatment
Diabetes is not a curable disease, but it can be controlled successfully,
allowing sufferers to lead a normal life. Treatment differs for both
types of diabetes.
Most of the symptoms of diabetes
are logical. Think about what would
happen if your blood glucose
concentration remained high, but
the level of glucose in your cells
was low.
Type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes is controlled by regular injections of insulin and is
therefore said to be insulin-dependent.
People with the condition have to regularly test their blood glucose
concentration, normally by pricking their finger. The drop of blood is
then analysed by a machine, which tells the person their blood glucose
concentration. Based on this concentration, the person can work out the
dose of insulin they need to inject. The insulin administered increases
the amount of glucose absorbed by cells and causes glycogenesis to occur,
resulting in a reduction of blood glucose concentration.
If a person with diabetes injects himself or herself with too much
insulin, they may experience hypoglycaemia (very low blood glucose
concentrations) that can result in unconsciousness. However, too low
an insulin dose results in hyperglycaemia, which can also result in
unconsciousness and death if left untreated. Careful monitoring and
dose regulation is therefore required.
Figure 2 People with type 1 diabetes
need regular insulin injections. As insulin
is a protein, it cannot be taken by mouth
because it will be digested
Figure 3 shows how blood glucose concentration and insulin levels
vary in a person with type 1 diabetes, and a person without diabetes.
If the person with diabetes injects himself or herself with insulin, there
will be a surge of insulin in their blood which will cause their blood
glucose level to drop quickly.
Type 2 diabetes
The first line of control in type 2 diabetes is to regulate the person's
carbohydrate intake through their diet and matching this to their
exercise levels. This often involves increasing exercise levels.
Overweight people are also encouraged to lose weight.
394
14.2 Structure and function
of the pancreas
Specification reference: 5.1.4
The pancreas is found in the upper abdomen, behind the stomach
(Figure 1). It plays a major role in controlling blood glucose
concentration, and in digestion. It is a glandular organ - its role is to
produce and secrete hormones and digestive enzymes.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the histology of the pancreas
► the examination and drawing
of stained sections of the
pancreas to show the histology
of the endocrine tissues.
Function of the pancreas
The pancreas has two main functions in the body, as an:
exocrine gland - to produce enzymes and release them via a duct
into the duodenum
endocrine gland - to produce hormones and release them into the
blood.
Role as an exocrine gland
Most of the pancreas is made
stomach
up of exocrine glandular tissue.
This tissue is responsible for
bile ducts
liver
producing digestive enzymes
spleen
and an alkaline fluid known as
pancreatic juice. The enzymes and
juice are secreted into ducts which
pancreas
eventually lead to the pancreatic
gallbladder
small
duct. From here they are released
colon
intestine
into the duodenum, the top part of
the small intestine. The pancreas
body
produces three important types of
bile
A pancreatic
duct head
duct
digestive enzymes:
Amylases – break down
A Figure 1 Position of the pancreas in the body
starch into simple sugars. For
example, pancreatic amylase.
• Proteases - break down proteins into amino acids. For example,
trypsin.
Lipases - break down lipids into fatty acids and glycerol. For
example, pancreatic lipase.
tail
Role as an endocrine gland
The pancreas is responsible for producing insulin and glucagon. These
two hormones play an essential role in controlling blood glucose
concentration, which you will read about in Topic 14.3, Regulation of
blood glucose concentration. Within the exocrine tissue there are small
regions of endocrine tissue called islets of Langerhans. The cells of the
islets of Langerhans are responsible for producing insulin and glucagon,
and secreting these hormones directly into the bloodstream.
386
14
14.3 Regulation of blood glucose concentration
Control of insulin secretion
When blood glucose concentration rises above the set level, this
is detected by the B cells in the islets of Langerhans and insulin is
released. The mechanism by which this occurs is as follows:
1
2
3
At normal blood glucose concentration levels, potassium channels in
the plasma membrane of B cells are open and potassium ions diffuse
out of the cell. The inside of the cell is at a potential of – 70mV with
respect to the outside of the cell.
When blood glucose concentration rises, glucose enters the cell by
a glucose transporter.
The glucose is metabolised inside the mitochondria, resulting in
the production of ATP.
The ATP binds to potassium channels and causes them to close.
They are known as ATP-sensitive potassium channels.
As potassium ions can no longer diffuse out of the cell, the potential
difference reduces to around -30mV and depolarisation occurs.
Depolarisation causes the voltage-gated calcium channels to open.
Calcium ions enter the cell and cause secretory vesicles to release
the insulin they contain by exocytosis.
4
5
6
7
resting state
glucose-stimulated state
voltage-gated
Ca2+ channel closed
voltage-gated
ca2+ channel open
no secretory
vesicles containing
insulin
membrane Ca2+
alog
membrane
hyperpolarised
Kup channel
open
secretory vesicles
containing insulin
depolarised
Kalp Channel
closed
insulin
granules
ATP.
ADP
ATP:
ADP:
metabolism
low
:
glucose
transporter
high glucose
glucose
transporter
glucose
43 of
mitochondria
Figure 5 Changes which occur in B cells in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas when stimulated by a high blood
glucose concentration
Summary questions
1 Describe what is meant by negative feedback.
(1 mark)
2 Describe the role glucagon plays in the control of blood glucose
concentration.
(3 marks)
3 Describe the changes which take place inside a B cell to cause the release
of insulin in the presence of high blood glucose concentration. (4 marks)
4 Explain how hormones return blood glucose concentration to normal
after a meal.
(6 marks)
392
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
14
As blood glucose concentration returns to normal, this is detected by
the a cells of the pancreas. When it rises above a set level, the a cells
reduce their secretion of glucagon. This is another example of negative
feedback. The feedback causes the corrective measures to be switched
off, returning the system to its original (normal) level.
blood containing
glucagon
fall in
blood
glucose
concentration
a cells in
the pancreas
liver
glycogen-glucose
gluconeogenesis
normal
blood
glucose
concentration
blood at normal glucose concentration turns off
corrective measure = negative feedback
Figure 3 Negative feedback in control of blood glucose concentration
Interaction of insulin and glucagon
Figure 4 shows how insulin and glucagon work together to maintain
a constant blood glucose concentration. Insulin and glucagon are
antagonistic hormones, that is, they work against each other.
to increase
blood glucose
level
detected by a cells of
pancreas, which
produce glucagon
detected by B cells of
pancreas, which
produce insulin
to decrease
blood glucose
level
blood
glucose
level falls
blood
glucose
level rises
glucagon
insulin
conversion of glycogen to glucose
increased cellular respiration
conversion of amino acids to glucose
conversion of glucose to glycogen
normal blood
glucose level
90 mg 100cm-3 blood
conversion of glucose to fat
uncontrolled quantity
of glucose enters
from intestines
absorption of glucose into cells
blood
glucose
level rises
negative
feedback
blood
glucose
level falls
A Figure 4 Summary of blood glucose concentration regulation
The system of maintaining blood glucose concentration is said to be
self-regulating, as it is the level of glucose in the blood that determines
the quantity of insulin and glucagon that is released. Blood glucose
concentration is not constant, but fluctuates around a set point as the
result of negative feedback. In times of stress adrenaline is released
by the body. One of the effects of this hormone is to raise the blood
glucose concentration to allow more respiration to occur. You will
find out more about the fight and flight response in Topic 14.5,
Coordinated responses.
391
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
14
Adrenal cortex
The production of hormones by the adrenal cortex is itself controlled
by hormones released from the pituitary gland in the brain. There are
three main types of hormones produced by the adrenal cortex:
Glucocorticoids. These include cortisol which helps regulate
metabolism by controlling how the body converts fats, proteins, and
carbohydrates to energy. It also helps regulate blood pressure and
cardiovascular function in response to stress. Another glucocorticoid
hormone released is corticosterone. This works with cortisol to
regulate immune response and suppress inflammatory reactions.
The release of these hormones is controlled by the hypothalamus.
Mineralocorticoids. The main one produced is aldosterone which
helps control blood pressure by maintaining the balance between
salt and water concentrations in the blood and body fluids. Its
release is mediated by signals triggered by the kidney.
Androgens. Small amounts of male and female sex hormones
are released - their impact is relatively small compared with the
larger amounts of hormones, such as oestrogen and testosterone,
released by the ovaries or testes after puberty, but they are still
important, especially in women after the menopause.
Adrenal medulla
The hormones of the adrenal medulla are released when the sympathetic
nervous system is stimulated. This occurs when the body is stressed.
You can find out more about the fight or flight response in Topic 14.5,
Coordinated responses.
The hormones secreted by the adrenal medulla are:
Adrenaline. This increases the heart rate sending blood quickly
to the muscles and brain. It also rapidly raises blood glucose
concentration levels by converting glycogen to glucose in the liver.
Noradrenaline. This hormone works with adrenaline in response to
stress, producing effects such as increased heart rate, widening of
pupils, widening of air passages in the lungs, and the narrowing
of blood vessels in non-essential organs (resulting in higher blood
pressure).
Summary questions
1 Using a named example, explain the function of an endocrine gland.
(2 marks)
2 Describe the pathway triggered by a stimulus in hormonal
communication.
(2 marks)
3 Bright light causes the iris muscles in your eyes to contract, constricting the
pupil and preventing damage to the eye. State and explain whether hormonal
or neuronal communication would be used in this response. (2 marks)
A person falls into a fast-flowing river. State and explain the changes
that may occur in the body and increase the person's chances
of survival in this situation.
(6 marks)
385
14
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
glucose swallowed
In some cases, diet and exercise are not
enough to control blood glucose concentration
so drugs also have to be used. These
can include drugs that stimulate insulin
production, drugs that slow down the rate
at which the body absorbs glucose from
the intestine, and ultimately even insulin
injections.
insulin
level
non-diabetic
B cells in pancreas
release insulin in
response to increase
in blood glucose level
Relative concentration of insulin in the blood
diabetic - type i
there is no insulin
response to raised
blood glucose level
Medically produced insulin
Originally, insulin was obtained from the
pancreas of cows and pigs which had been
slaughtered for food. This process was difficult
and expensive. The insulin extracted could also
cause allergic reactions as it differed slightly
from human insulin.
C 0.20
blood
glucose
level
0.15
In 1955, the structure of human insulin was
identified and it is now made by genetically
modified bacteria. This has a number of
advantages:
concentration of glucose in the blood/gdm-3
diabetic - type i
blood glucose level is
slow to return to normal
as it is used up by cells
0-
non-diabetic
insulin rapidly reduces blood
glucose level to normal
50.05+
0
time/h
Human insulin is produced in a pure form
– this means it is less likely to cause allergic
reactions.
Insulin can be produced in much higher
quantities.
Production costs are much cheaper.
People's concerns over using animal
products in humans, which may be
religious or ethical, are overcome.
Figure 3 Comparison of blood glucose and insulin levels in a
person with type 1 diabetes and a person without diabetes after each
has swallowed a glucose tablet
Synoptic link
Potential use of stem cells in diabetes treatment
For decades, diabetes researchers have been searching for ways to
replace the faulty B cells in the pancreatic islets of diabetic sufferers.
Each year, over 1000 people with type 2 diabetes receive a pancreas
transplant. After a year, over 80% of these patients have no symptoms
of diabetes and do not have to take insulin. However, the demand for
transplantable pancreases far outweighs their availability. The risk
of having a transplant can also be a greater health risk than the
diabetes itself - immunosuppressant drugs are required to ensure
the body accepts the transplanted pancreas, which can leave a person
susceptible to infection.
You will find out how bacteria are
genetically engineered to produce
human insulin in Topic 21.4,
Genetic engineering, and about
the industrial production of
insulin in 22.5, Microorganisms,
medicines, and bioremediation.
Doctors have attempted to cure diabetes by injecting patients
with pancreatic B islet cells, but fewer than 8% of cell transplants
performed have been successful. The immunosuppressant drugs used
to prevent rejection of these cells increases the metabolic demand
on insulin-producing cells. Eventually this exhausts their capacity to
produce insulin.
395
14
14.4 Diabetes and its control
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 6.5, Stem cells
to remind yourself of the different
types of stem cell that exist and
the sources of stem cells.
As type 1 diabetes results from the loss of a single cell type, and there
is evidence that a relatively small number of islet cells can restore
insulin production, the disease is a perfect candidate for stem cell
therapy. Totipotent stem cells have the potential to grow into any of
the body's cell types. Scientists have been researching the best type of
stem cells and the signals required to promote their differentiation into
B cells, either directly in the patient or in the laboratory before being
transplanted. It is likely that the stem cells used in diabetes treatment
would be taken from embryos. To obtain the stem cells, the early
embryo has to be destroyed. This means destroying a potential human
life. However, the embryos used as a source for these stem cells would
usually be destroyed anyway - they are 'spare' embryos from infertility
treatments or from terminated pregnancies.
Stem cells lines formed from a small number of embryos can be used
to treat many patients – each treatment does not require a separate
embryo. An alternative to using embryonic matter is that of using
preserved umbilical stem cells.
Stem cells offer many advantages over current therapies:
. donor availability would not be an issue - stem cells could produce
an unlimited source of new ß cells
reduced likelihood of rejection problems as embryonic stem cells
are generally not rejected by the body (although some evidence
contradicts this). Stem cells can also be made by somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT)
• people no longer have to inject themselves with insulin.
However, because our ability to control growth and differentiation
in stem cells is still limited, a major consideration is whether any
precursor or stem-like cells transplanted into the body might induce
the formation of tumours as a result of unlimited cell growth.
A Figure 4 A human embryo. Embryonic
stem cells could lead to the discovery
of new medical treatments (such as
the replacement of B cells in diabetes
patients) that would alleviate the
suffering of many people. However, many
people argue against using the cells, as
an embryo has to be destroyed, approx
x600 magnification
Summary questions
1 Copy and complete the table to compare and contrast the differences
between the causes of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. (3 marks)
Type 1
Type 2
Cause
When does it develop
Period of development
2 Explain why people with type 1 have to constantly monitor their blood
glucose concentration.
(3 marks)
3 Explain why some who suffer from diabetes mellitus who can produce
insulin cannot control their blood glucose concentration. (3 marks)
4
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the different
treatments for diabetes.
(6 marks)
396
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
14.1 Hormonal communication
Specification reference: 5.1.4
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ endocrine communication
by hormones
► the structure and functions of
the adrenal glands.
In the previous chapter you looked in detail at how the nervous
system detects and responds to changes in the internal and external
environment. The body has a second system, the endocrine system,
which works alongside the neuronal system to react to changes. The
endocrine system uses hormones to send information about changes in
the environment around the body to bring about a designated response.
The endocrine system
Endocrine glands
The endocrine system is made up of endocrine glands. An endocrine
gland is a group of cells which are specialised to secrete chemicals –
these chemicals are known as hormones, and are secreted directly into
the bloodstream. Examples of endocrine glands include the pancreas
and adrenal glands.
Figure 1 shows the positions of the major endocrine glands in the
body and the hormones they secrete. The pituitary gland at the base of
the brain makes several hormones, which in turn control the release
of other hormones. The close proximity of the pituitary gland to the
hypothalamus ensures that the nervous and hormonal responses of
the body are closely linked and coordinated.
Pituitary gland - produces growth
hormone, which controls growth of
bones and muscles; anti-diuretic
hormone, which increases
reabsorption of water in kidneys;
and gonadotrophins, which control
development of ovaries and testes.
Male
Female
Pineal gland - produces melatonin
which affects reproductive
development and daily cycles.
Thyroid gland - produces thyroxine
which controls rate of metabolism
and rate that glucose is used up in
respiration, and promotes growth.
Thymus - produces thymosin which
promotes production and maturation
of white blood cells.
Adrenal gland - produces adrenaline
which increases heart and breathing
rate and raises blood sugar level.
Pancreas - produces insulin which
converts excess glucose into
glycogen in the liver; and glucagon,
which converts glycogen back to
glucose in the liver.
Testis - produces testosterone
which controls sperm production and
secondary sexual characteristics.
Ovary - produces oestrogen, which
controls ovulation and secondary
sexual characteristics; and
progesterone, oestrogen, which
controls ovulation and secondary
sexual characteristics; and
progesterone, which prepares the
uterus lining for receiving an embryo.
Figure 1 Position of the major endocrine glands in the body, hormones
are highlighted in green, white boxes are features common to both sexes
382
14
14.5 Coordinated responses
Table 1 Fight or flight physiological responses
Phu
Physical response
Purpose
heart rate increases
to pump more oxygenated blood around the body
pupils dilate
to take in as much light as possible for better vision
arterioles in skin constrict
more blood to major muscle groups, brain, heart, and
muscles of ventilation
blood glucose level increases
increase respiration to provide energy for muscle
contraction
smooth muscle of airways relaxes
to allow more oxygen into lungs
non-essential systems (like digestion) shut down
to focus resources on emergency functions
difficulty focusing on small tasks
brain solely focused only on where threat is coming from
Study tip
Action of adrenaline
One of adrenaline's main functions during the fight and flight
response is to trigger the liver cells to undergo glycogenolysis so that
glucose is released into the bloodstream. This allows respiration to
increase so more energy is available for muscle contraction.
Even though the fight or flight
response is automatic it is normally
triggered as a false alarm, such
as the panic you may feel when
sitting an exam – there is no threat
to your survival. The amygdala
(part of the brain that initiates
the fight or flight response) can't
distinguish between a real threat
and a perceived threat.
Adrenaline is a hormone. It is hydrophilic therefore cannot pass
through cell membranes. Adrenaline binds with receptors on the
surface of a liver cell membrane and triggers a chain reaction inside
the cell:
When adrenaline binds to its receptor, the enzyme adenylyl cyclase
(which is also present in the cell membrane) is activated.
receptor
adrenaline
(= first messenger)
1 The hormone adrenaline
approaches receptor site.
site
cell surface
membrane
adenylyl cyclase
(inactive)
adrenaline-receptor
complex
2 Adrenaline fuses to receptor site,
and in doing so activates an
enzyme inside the membrane.
adenylyl cyclase
(active)
adrenaline-receptor
complex
3 The activated enzyme converts
ATP to cyclic AMP, which
acts as a second messenger that
activates other enzymes that, in
turn, convert glycogen to glucose.
ATP
cyclic (second
AMP messenger)
activates enzymes
glycogen - glucose
A Figure 2 Second messenger model of hormone action
398
14
14.1 Hormonal communication
glucagon are responsible for controlling blood glucose concentration.
A number of organs are involved in this response.
Table 1 summarises the main differences between the actions of the
hormonal and nervous systems.
Table 1 Comparison of the hormonal and nervous systems
Hormonal system
Nervous system
communication is by nerve impulses
communication is by chemicals called
hormones
transmission is by the blood system
transmission is by neurones
transmission is very rapid
transmission is usually relatively slow
hormones travel to all parts of the
body, but only target organs respond
response is widespread
nerve impulses travel to specific
parts of the body
response is localised
response is slow
response is rapid
response is often long-lasting
response is short-lived
effect may be permanent and
irreversible
effect is temporary and reversible
Adrenal glands
The adrenal glands are two small glands that measure approximately
3 cm in height and 5 cm in length. They are located on top of each
kidney and are made up of two distinct parts surrounded by a capsule:
The adrenal cortex - the outer region of the glands. This produces
hormones that are vital to life, such as cortisol and aldosterone.
The adrenal medulla - the inner region of the glands. This produces
non-essential hormones, such as adrenaline which helps the body
react to stress.
capsule
adrenal cortex
medulla
kidney
A Figure 3 Structure of adrenal glands
384
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
(Remember that, by contrast, exocrine glands, such as those in the
digestive system, secrete chemicals through ducts into organs, or to the
surface of the body.)
Hormones
Hormones are often referred to as chemical messengers because they carry
information from one part of the body to another. They can be steroids,
proteins, glycoproteins, polypeptides, amines, or tyrosine derivatives.
Although they are chemically different, they share many characteristics.
Hormones are secreted directly into the blood when a gland is
stimulated. This can occur as a result of a change in concentration of
a particular substance, such as blood glucose concentration. It can also
occur as the result of another hormone or a nerve impulse.
Once secreted, the hormones are transported in the blood plasma all
over the body. The hormones diffuse out of the blood and bind to specific
receptors for that hormone, found on the membranes, or in the cytoplasm
of cells in the target organs. These are known as target cells. Once bound
to their receptors the hormones stimulate the target cells to produce a
response. You will find out more about how blood glucose concentration
is maintained in Topic 14.3, Regulation of blood glucose concentration.
The type of hormone determines the way it causes its effect on a target
cell. For example:
nucleus
lipid-soluble
steroid hormone
passes through
membrane receptor
protein
in cytoplasm
hormone-receptor
complex attaches
to DNA
DNA Y
Steroid hormones are lipid-soluble. They pass
through the lipid component of the cell
membrane and bind to steroid hormone
receptors to form a hormone-receptor
complex. The receptors may be present in the
cytoplasm or the nucleus depending on the
hormone. The hormone-receptor complex
formed acts as a transcription factor which in
turn facilitates or inhibits the transcription of
a specific gene. Oestrogen is an example of a
hormone which works in this way.
Non-steroid hormones are hydrophilic so cannot
pass directly through the cell membrane.
Instead they bind to specific receptors on
the cell surface membrane of the target cell.
This triggers a cascade reaction mediated
by chemicals called second messengers.
Adrenaline is an example of a hormone which
works in this way.
instructions for synthesis
of a polypeptide
membrane of a
target cell
cytoplasm
polypeptide synthesised by
ribosomes and mRNA
A Figure 2 Mechanism of action of steroid hormones
Hormonal versus neuronal communication
As hormones are not released directly onto their target cells, this
results in a slower and less specific form of communication than
neuronal communication. However, as hormones are not broken
down as quickly as neurotransmitters, it can result in a much longer
lasting and widespread effect. For example, the hormones insulin and
Synoptic link
You will find out how the second
messenger model works in
Topic 15.6, The kidney and
osmoregulation.
383
14.5 Coordinated responses
Specification reference: 5.1.5
On many occasions the body responds to changes in its internal
and external environment through a coordinated response. The
nervous and endocrine systems work together to detect and respond
appropriately to stimuli. One example of coordination between these
two systems is the mammalian 'fight or flight' response.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the coordination of responses
by the nervous and endocrine
systems.
hypothalamus
Fight or flight response
The fight or flight response is an instinct
that all mammals possess. When a
potentially dangerous situation is
detected, the body automatically triggers
a series of physical responses. These are
intended to help mammals survive by
preparing the body to either run or fight
for life, hence the name of the response.
activates
sympathetic
nervous
system
activates
adrenal-cortical
system by releasing
CRF
Once a threat is detected by the
activates
pituitary gland
autonomic nervous system, the
secretes hormone
adrenal
hypothalamus communicates with the
ACTH
medulla
sympathetic nervous system and the
releases
adrenal-cortical system. The sympathetic
impulses
releases
activate noradrenaline adrenaline ACTH arrives at
nervous system uses neuronal pathways
glands
adrenal cortex
to initiate body reactions whereas the
and
and releases
adrenal-cortical system uses hormones
smooth
approximately
muscles
bloodstream
30 hormones
in the bloodstream. The combined effects
of these two systems results in the fight
or flight response. The overall process is
combination of neuronal and hormonal activity results in "fight or flight' response
summarised in Figure 1.
The sympathetic nervous system sends
Figure 1 Summary of coordination of fight or flight' response
out impulses to glands and smooth muscles and tells the adrenal
medulla to release adrenaline and noradrenaline into the bloodstream.
These 'stress hormones' cause several changes in the body, including
an increased heart rate.
The release of other stress hormones which have a longer-term action
from the adrenal cortex is controlled by hormones produced by the
pituitary gland in the brain. The hypothalamus stimulates the pituitary
gland to secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This travels in
the bloodstream to the adrenal cortex, where it activates the release
of many hormones that prepare the body to deal with a threat. Look
back at Topic 14.1, Hormonal communication to remind yourself of
the structure and function of the adrenal glands.
The physiological responses which occur as part of the fight or flight
response are summarised in Table 1.
397
14
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
Caffeine
1
2
3
|
0.50%
392
380
360
400
1%
401
400
380
404
360
428
440
368
398
| 0.25% 0.10%
308 232
276 228
284204
268 232
292 248
260 256
280 240
308
216
285 232
5
332
1
368
340
320
362
8
|
Average
|
4
a (i) State the name given to a group cells
that work together to carry out a
function.
(1 mark)
(ii) State the name of the structure that
contains the alpha and beta cells in
the pancreas.
(1 mark)
(iii) Outline the roles of the alpha and
beta cells.
(4 marks)
b Describe the role of the red blood cells
with regard to the function of the alpha
and beta cells.
(3 marks)
c (i) State the name of the cell labelled A.
(1 mark)
(ii) State the function of cell A. (1 mark)
(iii) Explain why cells, of which cell A is
an example, are arranged in a different
way to the alpha and beta cells.
(5 marks)
A student carried out an investigation to
study the effect of caffeine on daphnia heart
rate. The following procedure was followed:
1 Daphnia, transparent aquatic organisms, of
the same species and size were placed on ice for
20 minutes before the experiment.
A single daphnia was then placed in a
beaker containing the solution under
investigation for 5 minutes.
3 A small quantity of cotton wool was placed
on a microscope slide.
4 A few drops of pond water were placed on the
cotton wool on the microscope slide.
5 The daphnia was then placed on a
microscope slide using a piece of filter
paper. A cover slip was not used.
6 A cavity slide containing cold water was
put under the microscope slide.
7 The daphnia was viewed under a low
power lens of light microscope focused on
the heart.
The number of heart beats every
30 seconds was then recorded.
9 This was repeated seven times for each
concentration of caffeine.
10 The same procedure was repeated for
solutions with different concentrations of
caffeine.
The table shows the results that the student
obtained.
a Describe the significance of the terms in
italics at each step in the procedure with
regard to the following:
(i) Reliability
(3 marks)
(ii) Experimental errors (3 marks)
(iii) Ethics
(2 marks)
b Plot a graph using the results in the table
(3 marks)
c Describe the trends shown in the
graph you have drawn for the different
concentrations of caffeine. (3 marks)
The standard deviation, calculated as the
square root of the variance, is used in the
t-test calculation to compare two sets of data.
d Describe what standard deviation shows.
(1 mark)
The variance is calculated in the following way:
Subtract the mean from each number in a
column and square the difference. Add all of
these squared differences together for each
column and divide by n - 1 (one less than the
number of results obtained). t is calculated
using the following formula:
x1 - x2 Where:
X, is the mean of the first data set
X, is the mean of the second
data set
S, is the standard deviation of the first data set
S, is the standard deviation of the second
data set
N, is the number of elements in the first data set
N, is the number of elements in the second
data set
e Calculate t for the 1% and 0.5% solutions
of caffeine and state whether there is a
significant difference between these two
sets of results.
(4 marks)
1
=-
405
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
14
AUDITI.
Adenylyl cyclase triggers the conversion of ATP into cyclic adenosine
mono-phosphate (CAMP) on the inner surface of the cell membrane
in the cytoplasm.
The increase in CAMP levels activates specific enzymes called
protein kinases which phosphorylate, and hence activate, other
enzymes. In this example, enzymes are activated which trigger the
conversion of glycogen into glucose.
This model of hormone action is known as the second messenger model.
The hormone is known as the first messenger (in this example,
adrenaline) and CAMP is the second messenger. One hormone
molecule can cause many CAMP molecules to be formed. At each
stage, the number of molecules involved increases so the process is
said to have a cascade effect (Figure 3).
enzymes
(8 molecules)
CAMP
(2 molecules)
hormone
(1 molecule)
A Figure 3 Cascade effect
Summary questions
1 State and explain two physical responses which occur as a result of the
'fight and flight' response.
(2 marks)
12 md
2 Explain why people often feel cold in times of stress.
3 Explain how the nervous and endocrine systems work together to
enable the body to respond to danger.
(6 marks)
399
14.6 Controlling heart rate
Specification reference: 5.1.5
The human heart beats at approximately 70 beats per minute at rest.
However, when you exercise, or in times of danger, it is essential
that the heart rate increases to provide the extra oxygen required for
increased respiration.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the effects of hormones and
nervous mechanisms on
heart rate.
Controlling heart rate
Heart rate is involuntary and controlled by the autonomic nervous
system.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 8.5, The heart
to remind yourself of the heart's
structure and the intrinsic
rhythmicity of the heart.
The medulla oblongata in the brain is responsible for controlling heart
rate and making any necessary changes. There are two centres within
the medulla oblongata, linked to the sinoatrial node (SAN) in the
heart by motor neurones:
one centre increases heart rate by sending impulses through the
sympathetic nervous system, these impulses are transmitted by the
accelerator nerve
one centre decreases heart rate by sending impulses through the
parasympathetic nervous system, these impulses are transmitted
by the vagus nerve.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 13.6,
Organisation of the nervous
system to remind yourself of the
two different functional systems
of the autonomic nervous system
- the parasympathetic and
sympathetic nervous system.
Which centre is stimulated depends on the information received by
receptors in the blood vessels. There are two types of receptors which
provide information that affects heart rate:
• baroreceptors (pressure receptors) – these receptors detect changes
in blood pressure. For example, if a person's blood pressure is low,
the heart rate needs to increase to prevent fainting. Baroreceptors
are present in the aorta, vena cava, and carotid arteries.
chemoreceptors (chemical receptors) - these receptors detect
changes in the level of particular chemicals in the blood such
as carbon dioxide. Chemoreceptors are located in the aorta, the
carotid artery (a major artery in the neck that supplies the brain
with blood), and the medulla.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 7.4, Ventilation and
gas exchange in other organisms
to remind yourself of transport of
carbon dioxide in the blood.
Chemoreceptors
Chemoreceptors are sensitive to changes in the pH level of the blood.
If the carbon dioxide level in the blood increases, the pH of the blood
decreases because carbonic acid is formed when the carbon dioxide
interacts with water in the blood. If the chemoreceptors detect a
decrease in blood pH, a response is triggered to increase heart rate -
blood therefore flows more quickly to the lungs so the carbon dioxide
can be exhaled.
This process is summarised in Figure 2
400
14
14.3 Regulation of blood glucose concentration
B cells detect this rise in blood glucose concentration and respond by
secreting insulin directly into the bloodstream.
Virtually all body cells have insulin receptors on their cell surface
membrane (an exception being red blood cells). When insulin binds
to its glycoprotein receptor, it causes a change in the tertiary structure
of the glucose transport protein channels. This causes the channels
to open allowing more glucose to enter the cell. Insulin also activates
enzymes within some cells to convert glucose to glycogen and fat.
Insulin therefore lowers blood glucose concentration by:
A Figure 1 Computer model showing
the structure of a molecule of the
hormone insulin. Insulin is a globular
protein made up of 51 amino acids
which are arranged into two chains
increasing the rate of absorption of glucose by cells, in particular
skeletal muscle cells
increasing the respiratory rate of cells - this increases their need
for glucose and causes a higher uptake of glucose from the blood
increasing the rate of glycogenesis - insulin stimulates the liver
to remove glucose from the blood by turning the glucose into
glycogen and storing it in the liver and muscle cells
increasing the rate of glucose to fat conversion
inhibiting the release of glucagon from the a cells of the islets of
Langerhans.
Insulin is broken down by enzymes in the cells of the liver. Therefore,
to maintain its effect it has to be constantly secreted. Depending on
the food eaten, insulin secretion can begin within minutes of the food
entering the body and may continue for several hours after eating.
Synoptic link
You will find out more about the
structure and function of the
liver in Topic 15.4, Excretion,
homeostasis, and the liver.
As blood glucose concentration returns to normal, this is detected by
the B cells of the pancreas. When it falls below a set level, the B cells
reduce their secretion of insulin. This is an example of negative feedback.
Negative feedback ensures that, in any control system, changes are
reversed and returned back to the set level.
Role of glucagon
Glucagon is produced by the a. cells of the islets of Langerhans in the
pancreas. If the blood glucose concentration is too low, the a cells
detect this fall in blood glucose concentration and respond by secreting
glucagon directly into the bloodstream.
Unlike insulin, the only cells in the body which have glucagon
receptors are the liver cells and fat cells - therefore these are the only
cells that can respond to glucagon.
Glucagon raises blood glucose concentration by:
Figure 2 Computer model showing
the structure of glucagon. The secondary
structure of the hormone as a coiled
ribbon can be seen and the atoms it
is made up of. Atoms are colour-coded
spheres (carbon: grey, nitrogen: blue,
and oxygen: red)
glycogenolysis – the liver breaks down its glycogen store into
glucose and releases it back into the bloodstream
reducing the amount of glucose absorbed by the liver cells
increasing gluconeogenesis - increasing the conversion of amino
acids and glycerol into glucose in the liver.
390
14
14.6 Controlling heart rate
If blood pressure is too low, impulses are sent to the medulla oblongata
centre which increases heart rate. The medulla oblongata sends impulses
along sympathetic neurones to the SAN which increases the rate at
which the heart beats. This increases blood pressure back to normal.
Hormonal control
Heart rate is also influenced by the presence of hormones. For
example, in times of stress adrenaline and noradrenaline are released.
These hormones affect the pacemaker region of the heart itself - they
speed up your heart rate by increasing the frequency of impulses
produced by the SAN. Look back at Topic 14.1, Hormonal control and
Topic 14.5, Coordinated responses to remind yourself how adrenaline
is released and its importance in the 'fight or flight' response.
Monitoring heart rate O
Heart rate can be determined by taking a pulse. Each time the heart beats a
surge of blood travels around the body, which can be felt as a pulse in your
blood vessels. The most common places to take a pulse are at the wrist
(radial artery) or in the neck (carotid artery). The number of pulses felt per
minute is equivalent to the number of times your heart beats per minute
(bpm). Many people who exercise regularly and have a keen interest in
monitoring their fitness levels wear a pulse monitor.
A group of students wanted to investigate how their heart rate was affected
by exercise (Table 1).
1 Devise a practical procedure to collect these data.
The following were collected from a sample of 10 students. The students'
pulse rates were measured at rest, during exercise, and two minutes after
completing exercise.
Study tip
You can find a full table of values
of Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient in the appendix.
2 State why it was important for the students to know the resting pulse
rates.
3 a Calculate the mean resting heart rate of the students.
b Calculate the standard deviation of the students' heart rate during
exercise.
02. Elx-x}
Vn-1
4
Study tip
Look back at Topic 10.6,
Representing variation graphically,
to see a worked example of how to
calculate the standard deviation of
a set of data, and how to calculate
a Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient.
a Calculate the percentage increase in the average heart rate two
minutes after exercise, compared with the resting heart rate.
b Calculate the Spearman's rank correlation coefficient between
the students' resting pulse rates, and their pulse rates
during exercise.
(6 marks)
c Evaluate the strength of the correlation between the two
sets of data.
(2 marks)
402
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
14
brain
centre that increases
heart rate
centre that decreases
heart rate
medulla oblongata
spinal cord
pressure and chemoreceptors
in wall of carotid artery
- carotid arteries
sympathetic nerve from
centre that increases
heart rate
pressure and chemo
receptors in aorta
parasympathetic nerve
from centre that decreases
heart rate
sinoatrial-
node
atrioventricular
node
aorta
left atrium
bundle of His
right atrium-
left ventricle
right ventricle
A Figure 1 Control of heart rate
increased
muscular/metabolic –
activity
more
carbon
dioxide
produced
by tissues
from
increased
respiration
blood pH
is lowered
centre in
medulla
oblongata that
speeds heart
rate,
increases
frequency of
impulses
to SAN
via the
sympathetic
nervous system
SAN
increases
heart rate
increased
blood
flow removes
carbon
dioxide faster
carbon
dioxide
level
returns to
normal
Figure 2 Effects of exercise on cardiac output
When the carbon dioxide level in the blood decreases, the pH of the blood
rises. This is detected by the chemoreceptors in the wall of the carotid
arteries and the aorta. This results in a reduction in the frequency of the
nerve impulses being sent to the medulla oblongata. In turn, this reduces
the frequency of impulses being sent to the SAN via the sympathetic
nervous system, and thus heart rate decreases back to its normal level.
Baroreceptors
Baroreceptors present in the aorta and carotid artery wall detect changes
in pressure. If blood pressure is too high, impulses are sent to the medulla
oblongata centre which decreases heart rate. The medulla oblongata sends
impulses along parasympathetic neurones to the SAN which decreases the
rate at which the heart beats. This reduces blood pressure back to normal.
401
14.3 Regulation of blood glucose
concentration
Specification reference: 5.1.4
During respiration the body uses glucose to produce ATP. To remain
healthy it is important that the concentration of glucose in your blood
is kept constant. Without control, blood glucose concentration would
range from very high levels after a meal, to very low levels several
hours later. At these very low levels cells would not have enough
glucose for respiration. Blood glucose concentration is kept constant
by the action of the two hormones - insulin and glucagon.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how blood glucose
concentration is regulated.
Increasing blood glucose concentration
Glucose is a small, soluble molecule that is carried in the blood
plasma. Blood glucose is normally maintained at a concentration of
around 90 mg cm- of blood. Blood glucose concentration can increase
as a result of:
Diet - when you eat carbohydrate-rich foods such as pasta and
rice (which are rich in starch) and sweet foods such as cakes and
fruit (which contain high levels of sucrose), the carbohydrates
they contain are broken down in the digestive system to release
glucose. The glucose released is absorbed into the bloodstream,
and the blood glucose concentration rises.
Glycogenolysis - glycogen stored in the liver and muscle cells is
broken down into glucose which is released into the bloodstream
increasing blood glucose concentration.
Gluconeogenesis - the production of glucose from non-carbohydrate
sources. For example, the liver is able to make glucose from glycerol
(from lipids) and amino acids. This glucose is released into the
bloodstream and causes an increase in blood glucose concentration.
Decreasing blood glucose concentration
Blood glucose concentration can be decreased by:
Respiration - some of the glucose in the blood is used by cells to
release energy. This is required to perform normal body functions.
However, during exercise, more glucose is needed as the body
needs to generate more energy in order for muscle cells to contract.
The higher the level of physical activity, the higher the demand for
glucose and the greater the decrease of blood glucose concentration.
Glycogenesis - the production of glycogen. When blood glucose
concentration is too high, excess glucose taken in through the diet
is converted into glycogen which is stored in the liver.
Study tip
There are a lot of new terms in
this topic - if you remember the
root of the words it will help you
remember the chemical process
they are referring to:
• lysis - means splitting
neo - means new
genesis - means birth/origin
Therefore, glycogenolysis
means the splitting of glycogen
(to produce glucose) and
gluconeogenesis means the
formation of new glucose.
Role of insulin
Insulin is produced by the B cells of the islets of Langerhans in
the pancreas. If the blood glucose concentration is too high, the
389
14
HORMONAL COMMUNICATION
Table 1
Student
Resting
pulse/bpm
Pulse rate during
exercise / bpm
Pulse rate after
exercise / bpm
62
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 10.6,
Representing variation graphically
to see a worked example of how to
calculate the standard deviation of
a set of data.
84
57
64
89
66
AWNA
84
58
101
80
74
98
75
92
72
90
600 V
68
65
60
64
86
68
66
67
95
94
10
75
Summary questions
1 Copy and complete the table to summarise the control of heart rate:
Stimulus
Nervous system
involved
vycin
Receptor
Effect on
heart rate
high blood pressure
low blood pressure
low blood CO,
concentration
high blood CO2
concentration
(4 marks)
2 Explain why an athlete's heart rate may increase just before a race
has begun.
(2 marks)
3 a Explain why blood pH values vary during exercise. (2 marks)
b Explain why an increase in the pH of blood leads to a decrease
in heart rate.
(3 marks)
403
14
Chapter 14 Practice questions
7.57
mean body mass
prevalence (%)
70-
6.5
6.0-
5.5-
mean body mass/Kg
5.04
diabetes
4.5 -
4.0 +
1990
1992
1994 1996
year
1998
2000
Practice questions
1 Insulin-dependent diabetes most often
appears during childhood. It is caused by
the autoimmune destruction of B cells in
the pancreas. In this autoimmune response,
specific white blood cells respond to proteins
on the surface of the B cells.
a (i) Name the hormone that will become
deficient due to the autoimmune
destruction of the B cells. (1 mark)
(ii) Suggest what happens to the proteins
on the cell surface membrane of the
B cells to stimulate the autoimmune
response.
(1 mark)
b In individuals with insulin-dependent
diabetes, there is excessive secretion
of glucagon. Increased glucagon
concentration in the blood results in
additional metabolic changes to those
cause by damaged B cells. Describe
the effects of increased glucagon
concentration on the liver.
ration on the liver.
(3 marks)
The graph shows the changes in blood
glucose concentration following a meal
in a diabetic individual and in a healthy
individual.
16.0
a Explain why the data in the graph indicates
a correlation and does not prove that
obesity is a risk factor in diabetes. (2 marks)
b Describe how the change in prevalence of
diabetes changes with mean body mass in
the graph.
(3 marks)
C Explain why the following symptoms may
be seen in diabetics.
(5 marks)
sudden weight loss, increased need to urinate,
dehydration
d It is believed by some scientists that
insulin resistance, the loss of sensitivity
of receptors to insulin, is a result of an
'energy surplus' within cells.
Some drugs used in the treatment of type
2 diabetes have been found to be inhibitors
of ATP synthase of protein complexes in
the electron transport chains.
Suggest why this activity would lead to an
increase in receptor sensitivity to insulin.
(3 marks)
The pancreas acts as both an endocrine and
exocrine gland. The diagram shows the
arrangement of some of the different types of
cells present in the pancreas.
diabetic
individual
blood glucose concentration/
mmoldm-3
3
Fhealthy
Eindividual
0 30 60 90 120
time after meal/min
(i) Describe the changes in blood
glucose concentration in the diabetic
individual for the 120 minutes
following the meal. (3 marks)
(ii) Explain the changes in blood
glucose concentration in the healthy
individual for the 120 minutes
following the meal. (3 marks)
OCR Jan 2010
One risk factor that increases the risk of
developing Type 2 diabetes is obesity.
The graph shows how prevalence of diabetes
and mean body mass changed in one
population from 1990 to 2000.
alpha cell-
2
.
red blood cells
2
beta cell
404
