21
MANIPULATING GENOMES
DNA, equivalent to the DNA from the nuclei of about
10000 human cells. Now, using a technique called the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), the tiniest fragment of
tissue can give scientists enough DNA to develop a profile.
extraction
DNA is extracted
from the sample
digestion
restriction endo-
nucleases cut the
DNA into fragments
2 Digesting the sample
The strands of DNA are cut into small fragments using
special enzymes called restriction endonucleases.
Different restriction endonucleases cut DNA at a specific
nucleotide sequence, known as a restriction site or
recognition site. All restriction endonucleases make two
cuts, once through each strand of the DNA double helix.
There are many different restriction endonucleases -
the recognition sequences and cut sites of three
examples are given in Table 1.
gel plate
large
fragments
separation
fragments are
separated using
gel electrophoresis
direction of
movement
Restriction endonucleases give scientists the ability to cut small
fragments
the DNA strands at defined points in the introns. They use a
mixture of restriction enzymes that leave the repeating units
or satellites intact, so the fragments at the end of the process
include a mixture of intact mini- and microsatellite regions. 4
Table 1 Three restriction enzymes and the nucleotide sequences
they recognise. The black triangles show where they cut
nylon
membrane
separation (cont.)
DNA fragments
are transferred
from the gel to
nylon membrane
in a process
known as
Southern blotting
Enzyme
plate
Sau3A1
Recognition sequence
5'... 'GATC...3
3'...CTAGA...5
5'...GCYGGCCGC...3'
3'... CGCCGG.CG...5
5'...AG'CT...3
3'...TC.GA...5
Not1
DNA
probes
hybridisation
DNA probes are
added to label
the fragments.
These radioactive
probes attach to
specific fragments
Alu 1
nylon sheet with
radioactively labelled
DNA strands
3 Separating the DNA fragments
To produce a DNA profile, the cut fragments of DNA
need to be separated to form a clear and recognisable pattern.
This is done using electrophoresis, a technique that utilises
the way charged particles move through a gel medium under
the influence of an electric current. The gel is then immersed
in alkali in order to separate the DNA double strands into
single strands. The single-stranded DNA fragments are then
transferred onto a membrane by Southern blotting.
(See the Application box for more detail).
development
membrane with
radioactively
labelled DNA
fragments is
placed onto an
X-ray film
X-ray film
4
Hybridisation
development
(cont.)
development of
the X-ray film
reveals dark
bands where the
radioactive or
fluorescent DNA
probes have
attached
Radioactive or fluorescent DNA probes are now added in
excess to the DNA fragments on the membrane. DNA probes
are short DNA or RNA sequences complementary to a known
DNA sequence. They bind to the complementary strands
of DNA under particular conditions of pH and temperature.
A Figure 2 Summary of DNA profiling
This is called hybridisation. DNA probes identify the microsatellite
551
21
MANIPULATING GENOMES
a Hpal restriction endonuclease has a recognition
site GTTAAC, which produces a straight cut
and therefore blunt ends
b Hindill restriction endonuclease has the recognition
site AAGCTT, which produces a staggered cut and
therefore 'sticky ends'
line of cut (straight)
line of cut (staggered)
O
A
G
C G AA
recognition site
recognition site
A
sticky end
blunt
ends_
A
"sticky end' A
A Figure 2 Restriction endonucleases are used to isolate genes to be inserted into another organism
The formation of recombinant DNA
The DNA isolated by restriction endonucleases must be inserted into a
vector that can carry it into the host cell.
Synoptic link
You learnt about bacterial plasmids
in Topic 2.6, Prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells.
Vectors
The most commonly used vectors in genetic engineering are bacterial
plasmids – small circular molecules of DNA separate from the
chromosomal DNA that can replicate independently. Once a plasmid
gets into a new host cell it can combine with the host DNA to form
what is called recombinant DNA. Plasmids are particularly effective
in the formation of genetically engineered bacteria used, for example,
to make human proteins.
The plasmids that are used as vectors are often chosen because they
contain what is known as a marker gene. For example they may have
been engineered to have a gene for antibiotic resistance. This gene
enables scientists to determine that the bacteria have taken up the
plasmid, by growing the bacteria in media containing the antibiotic.
To insert a DNA fragment into a plasmid, first it must be cut open.
The same restriction endonuclease as used to isolate the DNA
fragment is used to cut the plasmid. This results in the plasmid having
complementary sticky ends to the sticky ends of the DNA fragment.
Once the complementary bases of the two sticky ends are lined up, the
enzyme DNA ligase forms phosphodiester bonds between the sugar
and the phosphate groups on the two strands of DNA, joining them
together (Figure 2).
The plasmids used as vectors are usually given a second marker gene,
which is used to show that the plasmid contains the recombinant
gene. This marker gene is itself often placed in the plasmid by
genetic engineering methods. The plasmid is then cut by a restriction
565
21
21.4 Genetic engineering
gene producing
fluorescence
DNA from cell which
manufactures the desired
protein, e.g., insulin
plasmid
enzyme within this marker gene to insert the
desired gene. If the DNA fragment is inserted
successfully, the marker gene will not function.
In the early days of genetic engineering,
these marker genes were often for antibiotic
resistance. There have, however, been
many concerns about antibiotic resistance in
genetically engineered organisms. As a result,
genes producing fluorescence or an enzyme
that causes a colour change in a particular
medium are now more widely used as marker
genes. If a bacterium does not fluoresce, or
change the colour of the medium, then it has
been engineered successfully and can be grown
on (Figure 3).
DNA and plasmid are both cut
using the same restriction endonuclease.
gene for
antibiotic
resistance, e.g.
to ampicillin
or penicillin
plasmid
cut open
'sticky ends' of
DNA fragment
DNA fragments and
Open plasmids are
mixed together
with DNA ligase
Transferring the vector
The plasmid with the recombinant DNA must
be transferred into the host cell in a process
called transformation.
plasmid
with new
gene
incorporated
One method is to culture the bacterial cells
and plasmids in a calcium-rich solution and
increase the temperature. This causes the
bacterial membrane to become permeable and
the plasmids can enter.
Figure 3 Engineering a desired gene into a plasmid vector
Another method of transformation is electroporation. A small
electrical current is applied to the bacteria. This makes the membranes
very porous and so the plasmids move into the cells.
Electroporation can also be used to get DNA fragments directly into
eukaryotic cells. The new DNA will pass through the cell membrane
and the nuclear membrane to fuse with the nuclear DNA. Although
this technique is effective, the power of the electric current has to
be carefully controlled or the membrane is permanently damaged or
destroyed, which in turn destroys the whole cell. It is less useful in
whole organisms.
Synoptic link
You learnt about antibodies in
Topic 12.6, The specific immune
system.
Electrofusion
Another way of producing genetically modified (GM) cells is
electrofusion. In electrofusion, tiny electric currents are applied to
the membranes of two different cells. This fuses the cell and nuclear
membranes of the two different cells together to form a hybrid or
polyploid cell, containing DNA from both. It is used successfully to
produce GM plants.
Electrofusion is used differently in animal cells, which do not
fuse as easily and effectively as plant cells. Their membranes have
different properties and polyploid animal cells - especially polyploid
mammalian cells - do not usually survive in the body of a living
organism. However, electrofusion is important in the production
566
21
21.1 DNA profiling
father
child
mother
regions that are more varied than the larger minisatellite regions.
The excess probes are washed off.
|||||||||
5 Seeing the evidence
If radioactive labels were added to the DNA probes, X-ray images are
taken of the paper/membrane. If fluorescent labels were added to the
DNA probes, the paper/membrane is placed under UV light so the
fluorescent tags glow. This is the method most commonly used today.
The fragments give a pattern of bars - the DNA profile - which is
unique to every individual except identical siblings.
Separation of nucleic acid fragments by
electrophoresis O o
DNA fragments are put into wells in agarose gel strips (Figure 4 and 5),
which also contain a buffering solution to maintain a constant pH. In one or
more wells (usually the first and last), DNA fragments of known length are
used to provide a reference for fragment sizing.
Figure 3 DNA profile of a child and
its parents. How many fragments were
inherited from each parent?
strip of
gel
mixture of DNA
fragments is
applied at point
called the origin
Wou
anode
cathode
When an electric current is passed
through the electrophoresis plate,
the DNA fragments in the wells at the
cathode end move through the gel
A Figure 5 Preparing a gel plate for
towards the positive anode at the other support to hold strip
electrophoresis
end. This is due to the negatively charged Figure 4 Gel electrophoresis apparatus
phosphate groups in the DNA fragments.
The rate of movement depends on the
The single-stranded fragments of DNA are transferred
mass or length of the DNA fragments - the gel has a mesh to the membrane, as they are unable to pass through
like structure that resists the movement of molecules. it. They are transferred in precisely the same relative
Smaller fragments can move through the gel mesh more positions as they had on the gel. They are then fixed in
easily than larger fragments. Therefore, over a period of place using UV light or heated at 80°C.
time, the smaller fragments move further than the larger
fragments. When the faster smallest fragments reach the
anode end of the gel, the electric current is switched off.
The gel is then placed in an alkaline buffer solution to
denature the DNA fragments. The two DNA strands of each
fragment separate, exposing the bases.
In a technique called Southern blotting (named after its
inventor, Edwin Southern), these strands are transferred
to a nitrocellulose paper or a nylon membrane, which
is placed over the gel. The membrane is covered with
several sheets of dry absorbent paper, drawing the
alkaline solution containing the DNA through the
membrane by capillary action (Figure 6).
Figure 6 Southern blot apparatus
Gel electrophoresis can also be used to separate
proteins. Explain why.
552
21.4 Genetic engineering
Specification reference: 6.1.3
DNA sequencing and proteomics provide us with a detailed
Learning outcomes
understanding of an organism's genetic instructions. Advances in
Demonstrate knowledge,
these technologies and molecular biotechnology techniques means
understanding, and application of:
it is now possible to manipulate an organism's genome to achieve a
desired outcome. This manipulation of the genome is called genetic
→ the principles of genetic
engineering. The basic principles of genetic engineering involve
engineering
isolating a gene for a desirable characteristic in one organism and
► the techniques used in
placing it into another organism, using a suitable vector. The two
genetic engineering
organisms between which the genes are transferred may be the same,
similar, or very different species. An organism that carries a gene
from another organism is termed 'transgenic' and is often called a
bacterial cell
genetically modified organism (GMO).
plasmid
mRNA extracted from
human pancreatic cells
Isolating the desired gene
The first stage of successful genetic modification is to isolate the
desirable gene.
plasmid obtained
from bacteria
mRNA
plasmid
cut with
restriction
enzyme
cDNA
mRNA treated
with reverse
transcriptase
to make
complementary
DNA (CDNA)
plasmid and
cDNA fused
using DNA ligase
The most common technique uses enzymes called restriction
endonucleases to cut the required gene from the DNA of an
organism. As you learnt in Topic 21.1, DNA profiling, each type of
endonuclease is restricted to breaking the DNA strands at specific
base sequences within the molecule. Some make a clean, blunt-
ended cut in the DNA. However, many restriction endonucleases
cut the two DNA strands unevenly, leaving one of the strands of the
DNA fragment a few bases longer than the other strand (Figure 2).
These regions with unpaired, exposed bases are called sticky ends.
The sticky ends make it much easier to insert the desired gene into
the DNA of a different organism.
recombinant
plasmid
introduced into
host cells
bacteria
multiply in
a fermenter
and produce
insulin
Another technique involves isolating the mRNA for the desired
gene and using the enzyme reverse transcriptase to produce
a single strand of complementary DNA. The advantage of this
technique is that it makes it easier to identify the desired gene, as
a particular cell will make some very specific types of mRNA. For
example, B cells of the pancreas make insulin, so produce lots of
insulin mRNA molecules.
separation and
purification of
human insulin
human insulin
can be used
by diabetic
patients
A Figure 1 The production of human insulin
by genetically engineered bacteria was an
early success
564
MANIPULATING GENOMES
21.1 DNA profiling
Specification reference: 6.1.3
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
→ DNA profiling and its uses
→ polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and its application in
DNA analysis
► the principles and uses of
electrophoresis.
Every person has a unique combination of DNA in the chromosomes
of their cells, unless they are an identical twin or triplet. Your DNA
is more similar to your family members' than to other people's, and
more similar to other people's than to a gorilla's, a butterfly's or a
banana's. It is this combination of individual uniqueness yet similarity
to other family or species members that makes DNA so useful in
solving crimes, predicting disease, and classifying organisms.
The human genome
The genome of an organism is all of the genetic material it contains - for
eukaryotes including ourselves, that is the DNA in the nucleus and the
mitochondria combined. The chromosomes are made up of hundreds
of millions of DNA base pairs, but your genes, the 20–25000 regions of
the DNA that code for proteins, only make up about 2% of your total
DNA. They are called exons. The large non-coding regions of DNA
that are removed from messenger (m)RNA before it is translated into a
polypeptide chain are known as introns. Scientists are still investigating
the role of non-coding DNA.
A Figure 1 All three of these girls have
identical DNA because they were formed
from a single fertilised egg - and this
included both coding DNA and introns.
However, the DNA of the great majority of
human beings is unique to each individual
Synoptic link
You have learnt about the structure
of DNA and RNA in in Topic 3.8,
Nucleic acids. You learnt about mRNA
and transcription in Topic 3.10,
Protein synthesis. You learnt about
introns in Chapter 19, Genetics of
living systems.
Within introns, telomeres, and centromeres there are short sequences
of DNA that are repeated many times. This is known as satellite DNA.
In a region known as a minisatellite, a sequence of 20-50 base pairs
will be repeated from 50 to several hundred times. These occur at more
than 1000 locations in the human genome and are also known as
variable number tandem repeats (VNTRS). A microsatellite is a smaller
region of just 2–4 bases repeated only 5–15 times. They are also known
as short tandem repeats (STRS). These satellites always appear in the
same positions on the chromosomes, but the number of repeats of each
mini- or microsatellite varies between individuals, as different lengths of
repeats are inherited from both parents. So just as in the coding DNA,
only identical twins will have an identical satellite pattern, although the
more closely related you are to someone, the more likely you are to have
similar patterns. These patterns in the non-coding DNA were discovered
by Professor Sir Alec Jeffreys and his team at Leicester University in
1984. Producing an image of the patterns in the DNA of an individual is
known as DNA profiling and is a technique employed by scientists to
assist in the identification of individuals or familial relationships.
Study tip
DNA profiling is also sometimes
referred to as genetic fingerprinting,
since every individual's DNA profile
is unique, just as a fingerprint is.
Producing a DNA profile
The process of producing a DNA profile has five main stages:
Do not confuse DNA profiling
with gene sequencing, which is
discussed in the next topic.
1 Extracting the DNA
The DNA must be extracted from a tissue sample. When DNA profiling
was first discovered, relatively large samples were needed - about lug of
550
21
MANIPULATING GENOMES
Infection outbreak - DNA sequencing and clinical intervention
o
This was the first time DNA sequencing has led to an
immediate and successful clinical intervention - but it
will certainly not be the last.
In 2012, there was an outbreak of MRSA (methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus) in the Special Care
Baby Unit (SCBU) at a UK hospital. The hospital infection
control team identified 12 patients carrying MRSA.
Researchers at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute used
DNA sequencing to show that all the bacteria were closely
related and this was a hospital-based outbreak.
The sequencing also showed that a number of people living
in the community who developed MRSA at the same time
all had the same strain as the hospital outbreak. In every
case it was found they had a recent link to the hospital.
Two months later, another baby developed MRSA in the
same SCBU. Immediate DNA sequencing showed that
it was the same strain as the previous outbreak. This
suggested that someone working in the hospital was
unknowingly carrying MRSA.
A Figure 3 Babies born early or with health problems are
very vulnerable to infection. Sequencing the genome of
pathogens so that effective treatment can be introduced as
fast as possible and outbreaks halted is a big step forward
Over 150 healthcare workers were screened - and
one staff member was found to be carrying MRSA. DNA
sequencing confirmed that it was the strain linked to the
outbreak. The healthcare worker went through a process
to eradicate the MRSA- and the risk of any further
infections was removed.
Scientists predict that advances in science and
technology may, in a few years, lead to every hospital
having its own sequencing machines and hand held
devices. These hand held devices would be capable of
sequencing the genome, identifying a pathogen within
a few minutes from just a drop of blood. Suggest some
of the benefits of such developments, and some of the
factors that will limit their arrival in our hospitals and
local surgeries.
The use of DNA sequencing was critical in identifying that
the infections were connected and that a member of staff
was a carrier. Without it, this would have been seen as a new
outbreak, and many more people could have been infected.
Summary questions oo
1 Explain the impact of computational biology and bioinformatics on the
usefulness of DNA sequencing to scientists.
(4 marks)
2 a Explain how the ability to sequence the genome can be
used to identify the source of an outbreak of infectious disease
and how this is helpful.
(4 marks)
b Discuss how DNA sequencing has changed the ways
in which we identify species and our understanding of
evolutionary relationships.
(6 marks)
3 'One-gene-one-polypeptide' is an outdated concept.
Discuss how our model of the link between the genotype and
phenotype is changing.
(9 marks)
563
21.3 Using DNA sequencing
Specification reference: 6.1.3
The development of DNA profiling and DNA sequencing has led to
the development of new areas of bioscience that help us analyse,
understand, and make use of all the data generated.
Computational biology and bioinformatics
People often use the terms computational biology and
bioinformatics interchangeably. In fact they describe different aspects
of the application of computer technology to biology.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how gene sequencing has
allowed for:
genome-wide comparisons
between individuals and
between species
the sequences of amino
acids in polypeptides to
be predicted
the development of
synthetic biology.
Bioinformatics is the development of the software and computing
tools needed to organise and analyse raw biological data, including
the development of algorithms, mathematical models, and statistical
tests that help us to make sense of the enormous quantities of data
being generated.
Computational biology then uses this data to build theoretical models
of biological systems, which can be used to predict what will happen in
different circumstances. Computational biology is the study of biology
using computational techniques, especially in the analysis of huge
amounts of biodata. For example, it is important in the analysis of the
data from sequencing the billions of base pairs in DNA, for working
out the 3D structures of proteins, and for understanding molecular
pathways such as gene regulation. It helps us to use the information
from DNA sequencing - for example in identifying genes linked to
specific diseases in populations and in determining the evolutionary
relationships between organisms.
Genome-wide comparisons
As whole genome sequencing has become increasingly automated, it
has become cheaper and faster, leading to some amazing advances in
biology. The field of genetics that applies DNA sequencing methods
and computational biology to analyse the structure and function of
genomes is called genomics.
A Figure 1 The impact of computers
on the study of biology is growing all
the time. This photo shows data from a
gel electrophoresis experiment where a
grapevine genome was sequenced
Analysing the human genome
Since the first complete draft of the human genome was published
in 2003 (Topic 21.2, DNA sequencing and analysis), tens of
thousands of human genomes have been sequenced as part of
research projects such as the 10 000 Genomes Project UK10K, and
most recently the 100 000 Genomes Project.
Synoptic link
Computers can analyse and compare the genomes of many
individuals, revealing patterns in the DNA we inherit and the diseases
to which we are vulnerable. This has enormous implications for
health management and the field of medicine in the future. Genomics
is changing the face of epidemiology. However, scientists increasingly
You learnt about epidemiology in
Topic 12.7, Preventing and treating
disease.
559
MANIPULATING GENOMES
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
DNA profiling is often used in solving crimes and only very tiny
amounts of DNA may be available. The PCR is a version of the natural
process by which DNA is replicated, and allows scientists to produce a
lot of DNA from the tiniest original sample.
The DNA sample to be amplified, an excess of the four nucleotide
bases A, T, C, and G (in the form of deoxynucleoside triphosphates),
small primer DNA sequences, and the enzyme DNA polymerase
are mixed in a vial that is placed in a PCR machine (also called
a thermal cycler). The temperature within the PCR machine is
carefully controlled and changes rapidly at programmed intervals,
triggering different stages of the process (Figure 7). The reaction can
be repeated many times by the PCR machine, which cycles through
the programmed temperature settings. About 30 repeats gives
around one billion copies of the original DNA sample- more than
enough to carry out DNA profiling.
DNA fragment
two new DNA fragments
DNA polymerase
attaching nucleotides
72°C
95°C
Step 1 Separating the strands:
The temperature in the PCR
machine is increased to 90-95°C
for 30 seconds, this denatures
the DNA by breaking the
hydrogen bonds holding the
DNA strands together so
they separate.
Step 2 Annealing of the primers:
The temperature is decreased to
55-60°C and the primers bind
(anneal) to the ends of the DNA
strands. They are needed for the
replication of the strands to occur.
Step 3 Synthesis of DNA:
The temperature is increased
again to 72-75°C for at least
1 minute, this is the optimum
temperature for DNA polymerase
to work best. DNA polymerase
adds bases to the primer, building
up complementary strands of
DNA and so producing double-
stranded DNA identical to the
original sequence. The enzyme
Taq polymerase is used, which is
obtained from thermophilic
bacteria found in hot springs.
step 3
step 1
nucleotides
separated strands
of DNA fragment
step 2
55°C
DNA
primer
DNA
primer
DNA strand with primers attached
A Figure 7 The main stages of the polymerase chain reaction
553
21
21.1 DNA profiling
Study tip
Forensic science can simply be
defined as the application of all
sciences to the law.
The uses of DNA profiling
DNA profiling has many uses. Its best known use is in the field of
forensic science, especially criminal investigations. PCR and DNA
profiling is performed on traces of DNA left at the crime scene. These
DNA traces can be obtained from blood, semen, saliva, hair roots, and
skin cells. The DNA profile is compared to that of a sample taken from
a suspect, or can be identified from a criminal DNA database. DNA
profiling is an extremely useful tool in providing evidence for either
the guilt or innocence of a suspect.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the use of DNA
profiling in identifying species
and demonstrating evolutionary
relationships in Chapter 10,
Classification and evolution.
DNA profiling is also used to prove paternity of a child when it is in
doubt. It is used in immigration cases to prove or disprove family
relationships. Identifying the species to which an organism belongs
can also now be done by DNA profiling, which is much more
accurate than any of the older methods. It is also increasingly
used to demonstrate the evolutionary relationships between
different species.
Pitfalls of profiling oo
One of the earliest recorded cases of mistaken DNA identity
occurred in the UK in 2000. Raymond Easton was in the
advanced stages of Parkinson's disease - he could hardly
dress himself yet he was arrested and charged with a
burglary that happened over 200 miles from his home. The
arrest was based solely on DNA evidence.
Another valuable use of DNA profiling is
in identifying individuals who are at risk
of developing particular diseases. Certain
non-coding microsatellites, or the repeating
patterns they make, have been found to be
associated with an increased risk/incidence
of particular diseases, including various
cancers and heart disease. These specific gene
markers can be identified and observed in
DNA profiles.
Four years earlier, Raymond had been involved in a family
dispute that had got out of hand. He received a police caution
and his DNA was taken and kept on file. DNA from the 2000
burglary scene appeared to match Raymond's profile.
The information that scientists can obtain
from DNA profiling is often used together
with the more detailed information obtained
from DNA sequencing (Topic 21.2) to make
more confident risk assessments for different
diseases.
Raymond protested his innocence and had a strong alibi for
the time of the burglary, so eventually a more rigorous DNA
test, looking at satellites in 10 loci rather than the original
six, was carried out. None of the additional satellites matched
Raymond's DNA and so the charges were dropped. This mis-
identification had been caused by an extremely improbable,
but not impossible, coincidental DNA profile match.
Summary questions
1 What is an intron?
(3 marks)
1 In a UK court of law, until recently DNA was taken
as evidence if 11 loci and a sex marker matched.
Recently this was put up to 17 loci. Suggest reasons
why 11 loci were acceptable and why the number has
now risen to 17.
DNA evidence at this level is not absolute. The
probability that full siblings will have the same DNA
profile for these 10 loci is quoted by the Forensic
Science Service as 1 in 10 000, and of first cousins,
1 in 100 million. Suggest explanations for these
observations.
2 State the purpose of the polymerase chain
reaction and explain how it has advanced
DNA profiling
(4 marks)
3 00 Discuss the benefits and
limitations of DNA profiling. (6 marks)
O
4 Produce a flow diagram to show the
main stages of the modern DNA profiling
process.
(6 marks)
554
21
21.3 Using DNA sequencing
recognise, with the exception of a few relatively rare genetic diseases
caused by changes in a single gene, that our genes work together with
the environment to affect our physical characteristics, our physiology,
and our likelihood of developing certain diseases.
Analysing the genomes of pathogens
Sequencing the genomes of pathogens including bacteria, viruses, fungi,
and protoctista has become fast and relatively cheap. This enables:
•
Doctors to find out the source of an infection, for example bird flu
or MRSA in hospitals.
Doctors to identify antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria, ensuring
antibiotics are only used when they will be effective and helping
prevent the spread of antibiotic resistance. For example, the
bacteria that cause tuberculosis (TB) are difficult to culture, slow
growing, and some strains are resistant to most antibiotics. Whole
genome analysis makes it easier to track the spread of transmission
and to plan suitable treatment options. This has enormous
implications for successful treatment of this potentially fatal
disease, especially as TB is spreading fast around the world again,
linked to the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Scientists to track the progress of an outbreak of a potentially
serious disease and monitor potential epidemics, for example flu
each winter, Ebola virus in 2014/15.
Scientists to identify regions in the genome of pathogens that may
be useful targets in the development of new drugs and to identify
genetic markers for use in vaccines.
Synoptic link
Identifying species (DNA barcoding)
Using traditional methods of observation, it can be very difficult to
determine which species an organism belongs to or if a new species
has been discovered. Genome analysis provides scientists with another
tool to aid in species identification, by comparison to a standard
sequence for the species. The challenge for scientists is to produce
stock sequences for all the different species.
You learnt about how organisms
are classified and grouped in
Topic 10.1, Classification.
One useful technique is to identify particular sections of the genome
that are common to all species but vary between them, so comparisons
can be made - this technique is referred to as DNA barcoding. In the
International Barcode of Life (iBOL) project, scientists identify species
using relatively short sections of DNA from a conserved region of the
genome. For animals, the region chosen is a 648 base-pair section of
the mitochondrial DNA in the gene cytochrome c oxidase, that codes
for an enzyme involved in cellular respiration. This section is small
enough to be sequenced quickly and cheaply, yet varies enough to
give clear differences between species. In land plants, that region of
the DNA does not evolve quickly enough to show clear differences
between species, but two regions in the DNA of the chloroplasts have
been identified that can be used in a similar way to identify species.
560
21
21.2 DNA sequencing and analysis
ready in 2000, and the first complete human genome sequence was
published in 2003, two years ahead of schedule and under budget.
Principles of DNA sequencing
Sequencing the genome of an organism involves a number of
different processes. The DNA is chopped into fragments and each
fragment is sequenced. The process involves terminator bases,
modified versions of the four nucleotide bases, adenine (A), thymine
(T), cytosine (C), and guanine (G), which stop DNA synthesis when
they are included. An A terminator will stop DNA synthesis at the
location that an A base would be added, a C terminator where a
C base would go, and so on. The terminator bases are also given
coloured fluorescent tags - A is green, G is yellow, T is red and C is
blue. The description of the sequencing process (capillary method)
explained here is a simplified version of a technique, has largely
been overtaken by much more complex methods - but the basic
principles remain the same:
A Figure 2 The contribution of
Fred Sanger to our knowledge and
understanding of genomes earned him
his second Nobel Prize
1
Synoptic link
You learnt about the structure of
DNA in Topic 3.8, Nucleic acids.
2
The DNA for sequencing is mixed with a primer, DNA polymerase,
an excess of normal nucleotides (containing bases A, T, C, and G)
and terminator bases.
The mixture is placed in a thermal cycler - a piece of equipment
as used for PCR (Topic 21.1, DNA profiling) that rapidly changes
temperature at programmed intervals in repeated cycles - at 96°C
the double-stranded DNA separates into single strands, at 50°C the
primers anneal to the DNA strand.
At 60°C DNA polymerase starts to build up new DNA strands by
adding nucleotides with the complementary base to the single-
strand DNA template.
Each time a terminator base is incorporated instead of a normal
nucleotide, the synthesis of DNA is terminated as no more bases
can be added. As the chain-terminating bases are present in lower
amounts and are added at random, this results in many DNA
fragments of different lengths depending on where the chain
terminating bases have been added during the process. After many
cycles, all of the possible DNA chains will be produced with the
reaction stopped at every base. The DNA fragments are separated
according to their length by capillary sequencing, which works
like gel electrophoresis in minute capillary tubes. The fluorescent
markers on the terminator bases are used to identify the final base
on each fragment. Lasers detect the different colours and thus the
order of the sequence.
The order of bases in the capillary tubes shows the sequence of the
new, complementary strand of DNA which has been made. This is
used to build up the sequence of the original DNA strand.
The data from the sequencing process is fed into a computer that
reassembles the genomes by comparing all the fragments and
finding the areas of overlap between them. Once a genome is
556
21
21.3 Using DNA sequencing
Synthetic biology
The ability to sequence the genome of organisms and understand
how each sequence is translated into amino acids, along with the
ever-increasing ability of computers to store, manipulate, and
analyse the data, has led to the development of the new field of
science called synthetic biology. Synthetic biology is defined by
the Royal Society as 'an emerging area of research that can broadly
be described as the design and construction of novel artificial
biological pathways, organisms or devices, or the redesign of
existing natural biological systems.'
Synthetic biology includes many different techniques. These include:
Figure 2 Mycoplasma mycoides,
the first organism to be controlled
by synthetic DNA, was created at the
University of California, USA in 2010.
Scanning electron micrograph, *21 000
magnification
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
microorganisms in industrial
contexts in Topic 22.4,
Microorganisms and
biotechnology, Topic 22.6,
Culturing microorganisms in
the laboratory, and Topic 22.7,
Culturing microorganisms on an
industrial scale.
genetic engineering - this may involve a single change in a
biological pathway or relatively major genetic modification of an
entire organism (further detail is given in the next topic)
use of biological systems or parts of biological systems in
industrial contexts, for example, the use of fixed or immobilised
enzymes and the production of drugs from microorganisms
the synthesis of new genes to replace faulty genes, for example,
in developing treatments for cystic fibrosis (CF), scientists have
attempted to synthesise functional genes in the laboratory and use
them to replace the faulty genes in the cells of people affected by CF
the synthesis of an entire new organism. In 2010, scientists
announced that they had created an artificial genome for a
bacterium and successfully replaced the original genome with this
new, functioning genome.
Synthetic life
Scientists have developed some new nucleotide bases (not adenine,
thymine, cytosine, or guanine) which, in a test tube, can be incorporated
into a strand of DNA by special enzymes. The bases fit together well-
they are not held by hydrogen bonds like the natural bases.
In 2014, scientists introduced a small section of DNA made with these
synthetic bases into bacteria. They found that this unique DNA, including
the synthetic nucleotide bases, was replicated time after time as long as
they supplied the bacteria with the synthetic bases.
If these bases can be incorporated into the main DNA of an organism,
and then transcribed into RNA, synthetic biologists will have
synthetically expanded the genetic code for the very first time.
Suggest a possible practical application for the synthetic expansion
of the genetic code.
562
MANIPULATING GENOMES
The barcoding system is not perfect - so far scientists have not come
up with suitable regions for fungi and bacteria, and they may not be
able to do so - but DNA sequencing is nevertheless having a big impact
on classification.
Searching for evolutionary relationships
Genome sequencing has given scientists a powerful tool to help them
understand the evolutionary relationships between organisms. DNA
sequences of different organisms can be compared - because the
basic mutation rate of DNA can be calculated scientists can calculate
how long ago two species diverged from a common ancestor. DNA
sequencing enables scientists to build up evolutionary trees with an
accuracy they have never had before.
Genomics and proteomics
Proteomics is the study and amino acid sequencing of an organism's
entire protein complement. Traditionally, scientists thought that each
gene codes for a particular protein, but we now know that there
are 20–25000 coding genes in the human DNA but a very different
number of unique proteins. Estimates range from somewhere between
250000 and 1000000 different proteins to only 17-18 000 so there is
still a lot of work to be done. More scientific evidence is emerging that
highlights the complexity of the relationship between the genotype
and the phenotype of an individual. The DNA sequence of the
genome should, in theory, enable you to predict the sequence of the
amino acids in all of the proteins it produces. The evidence is that the
sequence of the amino acids is not always what would be predicted
from the genome sequence alone. Some genes can code for many
different proteins.
Synoptic link
You learnt about pre-mRNA in
Topic 19.2, Control of gene
expression
Spliceosomes
The mRNA transcribed from the DNA in the nucleus includes both
the exons and introns. Before it lines up on the ribosomes to be
translated, this 'pre-mRNA is modified in a number of ways. The
introns are removed, and in some cases, some of the exons are
removed as well. Then the exons to be translated are joined together
by enzyme complexes known as spliceosomes to give the mature
functional mRNA. The spliceosomes may join the same exons in
a variety of ways. As a result, a single gene may produce several
versions of functional mRNA, which in turn would code for different
arrangements of amino acids, giving different proteins and resulting in
several different phenotypes.
Protein modification
Some proteins are modified by other proteins after they are synthesised.
A protein that is coded for by a gene may remain intact or it may be
shortened or lengthened to give a variety of other proteins.
The study of proteomics is constantly giving us increasing knowledge
of the extremely complex relationship between the genotype and the
phenotype.
561
21.2 DNA sequencing and analysis
Specification reference: 6.1.3
DNA sequencing is the process of determining the precise order of
nucleotides within a DNA molecule. This knowledge is invaluable
in various scientific applications, from diagnostics to biotechnology,
and its uses are explored further in the next topic. In recent years,
scientists have not only discovered how to read the information in the
genome-they have developed ways of reading it fast.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the principles of DNA
sequencing
► the development of new DNA
sequencing techniques.
The beginning of DNA sequencing
DNA sequencing was just an aspiration for scientists until Frederick
Sanger and his team developed some techniques for sequencing nucleic
acids from viruses and then bacteria. The technique involved radioactive
labelling of bases and gel electrophoresis on a single gel. The processes
were carried out manually, so it took a long time, but eventually, in
the 1970s, the technique now known as Sanger sequencing enabled
Sanger and his team to read sequences of 500–800 bases at a time. The
first entire genome that they sequenced was just over 5000 bases long
and belonged to phiX174, a virus that attacks bacteria. They went on
to sequence many other genomes, including the 16000 base pairs of
human mitochondrial DNA. In 1980, Frederick Sanger was awarded the
Nobel Prize for his work on sequencing DNA - this was his second Nobel
Prize, his first was in 1958 for determining the sequence of the amino
acids in insulin. These DNA sequencing techniques are continually being
refined. One such development was the swapping of radioactive labels
for coloured fluorescent tags, which led to scaling up and automation of
the process. This in turn led to the capillary sequencing version of the
Sanger sequencing method that was used during the Human Genome
Project (HGP), and similar techniques that are used today.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the structure
of proteins and nucleic acids in
Chapter 3, Biological molecules
and about the ultrastructure
of mitochondria in Topic 2.4,
Eukaryotic cell structure.
The human genome - pushing the boundaries
In 1990, the HGP was established. It was a massive international project
in which scientists from a number of countries worked to map the entire
human genome, making the data freely available to scientists all over the
world. The early work involved sequencing the DNA of smaller, simpler
organisms to refine and develop the techniques. In 1995, after 18 months
of work, scientists completed the 1.8 million base pair genome of the
bacterium Haemophilus influenza. By 1998, the UK team at the Sanger
Centre and a US team at Washington University had sequenced the
genome of Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans), a nematode worm widely
used in scientific experiments, before applying the technique to the three
billion base pairs of the human genome itself.
The aim was to complete the HGP in 15 years but the automation
of sequencing techniques and the development of more powerful,
faster computers meant that the first draft of the human genome was
Figure 1 From C. elegans to a human
being may seem a giant leap - but our
genomes are surprisingly similar. Scanning
electron micrograph, approximately *650
magnification
555
21
21.5 Gene technology and ethics
mind, including the transfer of disease resistance from one animal to
another, or to modify physiology in farmed animals.
Some examples of GM animals:
Swine fever-resistant pigs - in 2013 UK scientists successfully
inserted a gene from wild African pigs into the early embryos of
a European pig strain giving them immunity to otherwise fatal
African swine fever.
Faster-growing salmon - in the USA, GM Atlantic salmon have
received genes from faster-growing Chinook salmon. The genes
cause them to produce growth hormones all year round. They
grow to full adult size in half the time of conventional salmon,
making them a very efficient food source.
Pharming
One of the biggest uses of genetic engineering so far in animals is in
the production of human medicines - known as pharming. There are
two aspects to this field of gene technology:
Creating animal models - the addition or removal of genes so
that animals develop certain diseases, acting as models for the
development of new therapies, for example, knockout mice have
genes deleted so they are more likely to develop cancer.
Creating human proteins - the introduction of a human
gene coding for a medically required protein. Animals are
sometimes used because bacteria cannot produce all of the
complex proteins made by eukaryotic cells. The human gene
can be introduced into the genetic material of a fertilised cow,
sheep, or goat egg, along with a promoter sequence so the
gene is expressed only in the mammary glands. The fertilised,
transgenic female embryo is then returned to the mother.
A transgenic animal is born and when it matures and gives
birth, it produces milk. The milk will contain the desired human
protein and can be harvested.
Ethical issues
There are many potential benefits to people and indeed to animal
health of genetic engineering but the process also raises some ethical
questions, which include:
Figure 3 These transgenic sheep
have a human gene in their DNA. This
gene codes for the protein alpha-1-
antitrypsin (AAT). Hereditary deficiency
of AAT leads to emphysema. The gene
activates AAT production in the sheep's
milk which can be isolated and used for
therapy
Should animals be genetically engineered to act as models of
human disease?
Is it right to put human genes into animals?
Is it acceptable to put genes from another species into an animal
without being certain it will not cause harm?
Does genetically modifying animals reduce them to commodities?
Is welfare compromised during the production of genetically
engineered animals?
572
MANIPULATING GENOMES
Table 1 Continued
Perceived pros of GM crops
Perceived cons of GM crops
Genetically engineered
characteristic
Extended shelf-life
Extended shelf-life may reduce the
commercial value and demand for the crop.
Growing conditions
The extended shelf-life of some GM crops
reduces food waste.
Crops can grow in a wider range of conditions/
survive adverse conditions, e.g., flood
resistance or drought resistance.
Nutritional value of crops can be increased,
e.g., enhanced levels of vitamins.
Plants could be used to produce human
medicines and vaccines.
Nutritional value
People may be allergic to the different proteins
made in GM crops.
Medical uses
Patenting and technology transfer
One of the major concerns about GM crops is that people in less
economically developed countries will be prevented from using
them by patents and issues of technology transfer. When someone
discovers a new technique or invents something, they can apply
for a legal patent, which means that no one else can use it without
payment. The people who most need the benefits of, for instance,
drought- or flood-resistant crops, high yields, and added nutritional
value may therefore be unable to afford the GM seed. They also rely
on harvesting seed from one year to plant the next - something that
patenting may make impossible.
These concerns are based on evidence. The company that
developed the herbicide-resistant and pesticide-producing soya
beans, have patented them so farmers can buy the beans from
them and grow them to use or sell them for food or processing
only in the year they are bought. They cannot save the seed to
grow again the next year - and in 2013 this was upheld in the US
Supreme Court.
Some organisations, however, such as the International Rice Research
Institute (IRRI), work to develop engineered rice specifically to
support farmers in less economically developed countries with whom
they share the technological developments without patent constraints
on seed harvesting. For example, they have engineered flood-resistant
'scuba' rice, which gives 70-80% of maximum potential yield even if
submerged for 2–3 weeks by flooding.
GM animals
It is much harder to produce GM vertebrates, especially mammals, but
scientists are researching the use of microinjections - tiny particles of
gold covered in DNA – and modified viruses to carry new genes into
animal DNA. Such techniques are used with a number of goals in
571
MANIPULATING GENOMES
assembled, scientists want to identify the genes or parts of the
genome that code for specific characteristics. Medical researchers
want to identify regions that are linked with particular diseases.
Many genomes are freely available online - anyone who chooses
to can have a look at them.
Stages 1-2: DNA strand chopped up, mixed with primer, bases,
DNA polymerase + terminator bases
©
AGCO @
primer
TAC GG AT CA
Stage 3: Each time a terminator base is added a strand terminates
until all possible chains produced
HA-0-6
Stage 5: Computer analysis of all data
to give original DNA sequence
--0-@-©©
H0-0-0-0-0-0
H -0--©-©-0 A
Hø-0-0-0-©-0-0-G
H -0-0-0-0-0-0-0-0
Stage 4: Readout from capillary tubes: DNA fragments separated
by electrophasis in capillary tubes by mass and lasers
detect the colours and the sequence
A Figure 3 The main steps in the DNA sequencing process
Next-generation sequencing
Early on, working out the base sequence of even short strands
of DNA was difficult and time-consuming for scientists using the
original Sanger sequencing method. DNA sequencing technologies
have become faster and more automated as they have been
developed. Recently, technological developments have led to new,
automated, high-throughput sequencing processes. Instead of
using a gel or capillaries, the sequencing reaction takes place on a
plastic slide known as a flow cell. Millions of fragments of DNA are
attached to the slide and replicated in situ using PCR to form clusters
of identical DNA fragments. The sequencing process still uses the
principle of adding a coloured terminator base to stop the reaction
so an image can be taken. As all of the clusters are being sequenced
and imaged at the same time, the technique is known as 'massively
parallel sequencing' and sometimes referred to as 'next-generation
sequencing'.
557
21.5 Gene technology and ethics
Specification reference: 6.1.3
The rapid development of gene technology in recent years has made
many amazing scientific advances in the fields of genetic engineering
and biotechnology possible - but it has also raised a number of ethical
issues.
All scientists have a responsibility to consider the moral and social
values, or ethics, of their work. These ethical considerations are
important for many reasons including the protection of human
rights, human health and safety, animal welfare, and the protection
of the environment. Ethical lapses in scientific research can not only
cause harm but can also damage the public's trust in scientists and
their research. This in turn can have significant implications on the
advancement of knowledge and understanding. Clear and open two-
way communication between scientists and the public is vital for
building trust and regulating research.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the ethical issues relating to
the genetic modification of
organisms
→ the principles of, and potential
for, gene therapy in medicine.
Genetic manipulation of microorganisms
Microorganisms, particularly bacteria, have been genetically modified
or engineered to produce many different substances that are useful
to people, including insulin and vaccines. These substances can be
produced in very large quantities in this way.
GM microorganisms are also used to store a living record of the DNA
of another organism in DNA libraries. DNA sequencing projects,
such as the HGP (Topic 21.2, DNA sequencing and analysis), enable
scientists to build a collection of sequenced DNA fragments from one
organism that is then stored (and propagated) in microorganisms
(usually bacteria or yeast) through the process of genetic engineering
(Topic 21.4, Genetic engineering). These libraries serve as a source
of DNA fragments for further genetic engineering applications or for
further study of their function.
Figure 1 Microorganisms such as
these gut bacteria (Escherichia coli) are
widely used in scientific research into
genetic modification. Scanning electron
micrograph, 7500 magnification
Synoptic link
GM microorganisms are a widely used tool in research for developing
novel medical treatments and industrial processes, as well as the
development of gene technology itself. Genetically engineered
pathogens, however, are not widely used in these applications for the
obvious health and safety of the researchers and the wider public. In
the few cases that genetic modification of pathogens is carried out, this
is usually for the purposes of medical and epidemiological research
and is strictly regulated. There is, of course, the concern that genetic
engineering of pathogens could be used for the purposes of biological
warfare. Attempts to modify the genomes of pathogens to be more
virulent, or to be resistant to all known treatments, raises serious
ethical concerns and is a largely prohibited area of research except in
specialised military research facilities.
You will learn more about the
use of genetically modified
microorganisms and the enzymes
they produce in Chapter 22,
Cloning and Biotechnology.
569
21
21.5 Gene technology and ethics
Ethical concerns
Initially, some people were uncomfortable with inserting human genes
into microorganisms but the pure human medicines, antibiotics, and
enzymes produced are now seen as overwhelmingly beneficial. They
have been used safely for many years now. As a result, there is relatively
little ethical debate about the use of GM microorganisms except for the
manipulation of pathogens in biological warfare.
GM plants
Some people think the genetic modification of plants will help feed the
ever-growing human population, and overcome environmental issues
including excess carbon dioxide production and pollution. Others have
major concerns about the process.
A Figure 2 Scientists are currently
developing vaccines in transgenic plants
to many different diseases such as
malaria. Tomato, tobacco, and banana
plants are among those used
Insect resistance in GM soya beans
Soya beans are a major world crop - around 250 million tonnes are
produced each year and over half of the plants are from GM strains. In
one such modification, scientists have inserted a gene into soya beans
so that they produce the Bt protein. The Bt protein is toxic to many of
the pest insects that attack the plant and is widely used as a pesticide
by organic farmers. One increasingly widely used strain of soya beans
has been engineered to be resistant to a common weed killer and to
contain Bt protein. This means farmers can spray to get rid of weeds,
making all the resources of light, water, and minerals available to the
beans, and they do not need to use pesticides. These plants should
enable farmers to grow a much higher-yield crop of soya beans with
less labour and less expense.
Benefits and risks of GM crops
Some of the potential benefits and possible problems of GM plant
crops are summarised in Table 1. Also note that whenever antibiotic
resistance is used as a marker gene to create GM crops (Topic 21.4,
Genetic engineering) there is a perceived risk that this resistance could
spread to wild populations of plants and into bacteria.
Table 1 Pros and cons of GM crops
Perceived pros of GM crops
Perceived cons of GM crops
Genetically engineered
characteristic
Pest-resistant GM crop varieties reduce the
amount of pesticide spraying, protecting the
environment and helping poor farmers.
Non-pest insects and insect-eating predators
might be damaged by the toxins in the GM plants.
Pest resistance
Disease resistance
Increased yield.
Crop varieties resistant to common plant
diseases can be produced, reducing crop
losses/increasing yield.
Herbicides can be used to reduce competing
weeds and increase yield.
Insect pests may become resistant to
pesticides in GM crops.
Transferred genes might spread to wild
populations and cause problems, e.g.,
superweeds.
Biodiversity could be reduced if herbicides
are overused to destroy weeds.
Fear of superweeds.
Herbicide resistance
570
21
21.2 DNA sequencing and analysis
The process of massively parallel sequencing is integrated with state-
of-the-art computer technology and is constantly being refined and
developed. These high-throughput methods are extremely efficient and
very fast - the 3 billion base pairs of the human genome can be sequenced
in days and those of a bacterium in less than 24 hours. High-throughput
sequencing also means that the cost has fallen, so more genomes can
be sequenced. These techniques are being used by projects such as the
100000 Genomes Project. They open up the range of questions that
scientists can ask and enable us to use the information from the genome
in many new and different ways (21.3, Using DNA sequencing).
A Figure 4 The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute is the biggest DNA sequencing facility
in Europe - on this site, the genomes of organisms from bacteria and viruses to humans
and even human cancers are sequenced continuously in a highly automated process
Study tip
Summary questions
Be very clear about the differences
between DNA profiling, DNA
sequencing, and the role of PCR in
both processes.
1 Produce a flow chart to summarise the main stages of
DNA sequencing.
(5 marks)
What is the difference in the time it takes to sequence
the genetic material of a bacterium today compared to
the first complete bacterial genome in 1995?
(1 mark)
b Explain the reasons for the difference in these times. (2 marks)
(1 mark)
3 a What are terminator bases?
b Explain why terminator bases are so important in both the
Sanger method of sequencing and in the more modern
high-throughput sequencing methods.
(6 marks)
558
21
Chapter 21 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 The diagram is a simplified representation of
the apparatus used to separate fragments of
DNA in genetic engineering.
plastic gel box
gel
negative (-) electrode
positive (+) electrode
a (i) State the name of the process.
(1 mark)
(ii) Copy the diagram and indicate
where the sample of DNA fragments
would be placed and the direction
the fragments would move when an
electric field is turned on. (2 marks)
(iii) State the reason why the fragments
are placed in the position you have
indicated.
(1 mark)
(iv) Explain the reason for using a gel in
the separation process. (2 marks)
b Outline how you could identify the
position of a fragment you wanted to
locate.
(4 marks)
The fragment obtained, which usually
contains a particular gene under
investigation, then undergoes another process
called the polymerase chain reaction.
c Outline the reason for carrying out the
polymerase chain reaction. (2 marks)
The diagram shows one step in the
polymerase chain reaction.
53
e (i) Explain why fragments of DNA are
denatured during the polymerase
chain reaction.
(3 marks)
(ii) Compare the denaturation of DNA
with protein denaturation. (5 marks)
It has been discovered that genes make up only
about 3% of the human genome and over 50%
of the genome consists of repetitive nucleotide
sequences. Only recently has it been possible
to start to process the data produced from the
sequencing of these repetitive DNA sequences.
Bioinformatics is a field of study that has
developed methods and software programs to
handle the large quantities of data involved.
Epigenetic refers to processes that alter the
activity of genes without changing nucleotide
sequences.
a (i) State two techniques that might
be used to supply the data used in
bioinformatics.
(2 marks)
(ii) Discuss why the evidence for
epigenetics has only been discovered
as bioinformatics has developed as a
field of study.
(4 marks)
Synthetic biology refers to the design and
synthesis of biological components that
do not exist in the natural world or the
re-design of existing biological systems.
The guiding principles of synthetic
biologists have been stated as below:
• public benefit
responsible stewardship
intellectual freedom and responsibility
democratic deliberation
• justice and fairness
b Discuss what you believe to be the
relative importance of each of these
principles.
(7 marks)
3 DNA profiling is used to identify organisms
on the basis of their nucleotide sequences.
There are long sections of repetitive DNA,
called satellite DNA, in the genomes of most
organisms. Different individual have different
numbers of repeating segments in their
satellite DNA.
...
5' 31
1
in
13 5
d
(i) Describe what is happening in the
diagram.
(2 marks)
(ii) Explain the reason for the step you
have described.
(2 marks)
574
21
21.4 Genetic engineering
glyphosate
resistance gene bacterial cell plant cell gene transfer
DNA
plasmid
bacterial
antibiotic resistance gene suspension
dead cell
callus
antibiotic medium
1 Cut leaf
4 Allow callus to
sprout shoots and
roots
2 Expose leaf to bacteria
carrying a weedkiller-
resistance gene and
an antibiotic resistance
gene. Allow bacteria to
deliver the genes into
the leaf cells
3 Expose leaf to an
antibiotic to kill cells
that lack the new genes.
Wait for surviving
(gene-altered) cells to
multiply and form a
clump (callus)
5 The plants
are transferred
to soil where they
can develop into fully
differentiated adult plants
that are glyphosate resistant
Figure 4 Top-genetic engineering in
plants. Right - A clone of a genetically
modified tobacco plant growing in
nutrient agar in a petri dish
Summary questions
1 What is genetic engineering?
(3 marks)
2 Explain the difference between the way restriction endonucleases
and reverse transcriptases produce genes ready for insertion into
another organism.
(6 marks)
3 Describe how a gene is inserted into a bacterial plasmid, which is then
taken up by bacteria, and how scientists ensure that they can identify
bacteria that have been successfully transformed.
(6 marks)
4 Produce flow diagrams to show:
a The process of genetic engineering a bacterium.
b The process of engineering a plant.
(6 marks)
(6 marks)
568
MANIPULATING GENOMES
of monoclonal antibodies. A monoclonal antibody is produced by a
combination of a cell producing one single type of antibody with a
tumour cell, which means it divides rapidly in culture. Monoclonal
antibodies are now used to identify pathogens in both animals and
plants, and in the treatment of a number of diseases including some
forms of cancer.
Engineering in different organisms
The techniques of genetic engineering vary between different types of
organisms but the principles are the same. It is much easier to carry
out genetic modification of prokaryotes than eukaryotes, and among
the eukaryotes, plants are easier to work with than animals.
Engineering prokaryotes
Bacteria and other microorganisms have been genetically modified to
produce many different substances that are useful to people. These
include hormones, for example insulin and human growth hormone,
clotting factors for haemophiliacs, antibiotics, pure vaccines, and many
of the enzymes used in industry.
Engineering plants
One method of genetically modifying plants uses Agrobacterium
tumefaciens, a bacterium that causes tumours in healthy plants.
A desired gene - for example, for pesticide production, herbicide-
resistance, drought-resistance, or higher yield - is placed in the Ti
plasmid of A. tumefaciens along with a marker gene, for example, for
antibiotic resistance or fluorescence. This is then carried directly into
the plant cell DNA. The transgenic plant cells form a callus, which
is a mass of GM plant cells, each of which can be grown into a new
transgenic plant.
Transgenic plant cells can also be produced by electrofusion. The cells
produced have chromosomes from both of the original cells and so
are polyploid. The cells that are fused may be from similar species, or
very different ones. The main stages in this process involve removal of
the plant cell wall by cellulases, electrofusion to form a new polyploid
cell, the use of plant hormones to stimulate the growth of a new cell
wall, followed by callus formation and the production of many cloned,
transgenic plants.
Engineering animals
It is much harder to engineer the DNA of eukaryotic animals,
especially mammals, than it is to modify bacteria or plants. This is
partly because animal cell membranes are less easy to manipulate than
plant cell membranes. However, it is an important technique both to
enable animals to produce some medically important proteins and
to try and cure human genetic diseases such as CF and Huntington's
disease.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about cloning
plants in Topic 22.1, Natural
cloning in plants.
567
MANIPULATING GENOMES
Gene therapy in humans
Some human diseases such as CF, haemophilia, and severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCIDS) are the result of faulty (mutant) genes.
Scientists are looking at different ways of replacing the faulty allele
with a healthy one. They can remove the desired alleles from healthy
cells or synthesise healthy alleles in the laboratory.
Somatic cell gene therapy
This involves replacing the mutant allele with a healthy allele in the
affected somatic (body) cells. The potential for helping people with
a wide range of diseases is enormous. Until recently there were few
success stories as there are problems in getting the healthy alleles into
the affected cells, getting the engineered plasmids into the nucleus of
the cells, and finally difficulties in starting and maintaining expression
of the healthy allele. Viral vectors are often used.
In recent years, somatic cell gene therapy is beginning to
show signs of fulfilling its potential. Successful treatments have
been reported for diseases including retinal disease (people have
regained some vision), immune diseases, leukaemias, myelomas,
and haemophilia. The first gene therapy has recently (2012) been
approved by the European Medicines Agency for lipoprotein lipase
deficiency, which can cause severe pancreatitis. However, somatic cell
gene therapy is only a temporary solution for the treated individual.
The healthy allele will be passed on every time a cell divides by mitosis
but somatic cells have a limited life, and are replaced from stem cells,
which will have the faulty allele. In addition, a treated individual will
still pass the faulty allele on to any children they have.
Summary questions
1 o Suggest why there is
relatively little debate about
the ethics of genetically
engineering microorganisms.
(3 marks)
2 Draw a table to compare
somatic cell gene therapy
and germ line cell therapy.
(6 marks)
Germ line cell gene therapy
The alternative to treating the somatic (body) cells of people already
affected by a disease is to insert a healthy allele into the germ cells –
usually the eggs - or into an embryo immediately after fertilisation (as
part of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) treatment). The individual would be
born healthy with the normal allele in place - and would pass it on to
their own offspring. This is called germ line cell gene therapy.
Such therapy has been successfully done with animal embryos but
is illegal for human embryos in most countries as a result of various
ethical and medical concerns. These concerns include the fact that the
potential impact on an individual of an intervention on the germ cells
is unknown. Also, the human rights of the unborn individual could be
said to be violated because it is, of course, done without consent and
once done the process is irrevocable. Another major ethical concern
is that the technology might eventually be used to enable people to
choose desirable or cosmetic characteristics of their offspring.
3 a Suggest potential benefits
of genetically engineering
plants (6 marks)
b Discuss the ethical issues
(6 marks)
4 O Describe the process of
genetically modifying animals
to produce human proteins
and discuss some of the
ethical issues this raises.
(6 marks)
573
MANIPULATING GENOMES
21
A sample of DNA to be sequenced is first
amplified, then fragmented and analysed
using gel electrophoresis.
a (i) Explain why gel electrophoresis is
used to compare the DNA fragments
in the samples.
(2 marks)
(ii) State the name of the process used to
amplify a DNA sample. (1 mark)
(iii) State the name of the enzymes used
to produce the fragments of DNA and
explain their specificity to certain
sequences of nucleotides. (3 marks)
(iv) Explain why the degree of match
required differs for the samples of DNA
being compared in paternity testing
and forensic investigation. (3 marks)
5
a (i) Describe the changes in the areas of
land used for growing GM crops in
different parts of the world. (3 marks)
(ii) Suggest the reason(s) for the different
trends.
(3 marks)
b Discuss the ethical issues relevant to the
genetic modification of plants. (6 marks)
a Outline the differences between somatic
and germ line gene therapy. (4 marks)
Some diseases are a result of defective
mitochondria such as diabetes, nerve
degeneration, and some forms of blindness. It
has been proposed that mitochondrial diseases
could be cured during the process of IVF.
b (i) Explain why tissues with a high
metabolic demand such as muscle
and nervous tissue are often affected
by mitochondrial disease. (2 marks)
(ii) Suggest how the process of IVF could
be modified to cure mitochondrial
disease.
(3 marks)
(iii) Discuss whether the manipulation of
mitochondria to cure genetic disease
overcomes the arguments against
germline gene therapy. (5 marks)
victim
specimen
MINI HII JILID 1]
TIBULO TIL ILI ILI 12 suspects
INDINII III III 3
b (i) Using the information in the
diagram, identify the most likely
suspect.
(1 mark)
(ii) DNA profiles can also be used
to determine if an organism is
homozygous or heterozygous at
particular loci.
Suggest how this is possible. (3 marks)
The graph shows the changes in the area of
land growing genetically modified crops in
different parts of the world.
120
4
total
industrialized
countries
million hectares
developing
countries
2001
2002
2003)
2004
2005)
1999
2000
S
1996
1997
1998
year
2007
2008
575
