GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
19
a change in temperature or intensity of light. Internal factors can
change due to the release of hormones or psychological stress.
These factors will have a greater impact during the growth and
development of an organism.
Drugs can also affect the activity of regulatory genes. An example of
this was the drug thalidomide. Thalidomide was given to pregnant
women in the 1950s and 1960s to treat morning sickness. It was later
discovered that it prevented the normal expression of a particular Hox
gene. This resulted in the birth of babies with shortened limbs.
Thalidomide is currently used in the treatment of some forms of cancer.
The property of this drug that has previously caused problems during
pregnancy is being exploited to stop the development of some tumours.
It is believed that thalidomide prevents the formation of networks of
capillaries which are necessary for some tumours to grow and develop.
Figure 7 A girl with birth defects
caused by the drug thalidomide. This
drug was given to pregnant women in
the 1950s and 1960s to treat morning
sickness, until it was discovered to
cause severe malformations in babies
Ontology doesn't mimic phylogeny
5993333
The theory of recapitulation states that as organisms develop from fertilised egg
to embryo they repeat the evolutionary process that they have been through. In
biology, this can be summarised by the phrase ontology (the development of an
organism) mimics phylogeny (the evolutionary history of an organism).
This theory is not accepted by modern biologists but a modern theory states
that 'oncology (the study of cancer) recapitulates ontology'. This refers to the
discovery that genes originally expressed in the development of the embryo
are expressed again by cancerous cells.
Use your knowledge of Hox genes to suggest their possible roles in the
development of certain tumours.
A Figure 8 The drawing above was
made in the 19th century as evidence
supporting this theory.
Summary questions
1 Explain, with reference to their body shape, why human beings
are referred to as bilaterally symmetrical but jellyfish are radially
symmetrical.
(3 marks)
2 The Hox gene Pax6 is necessary for the normal development of the
retina in humans. A mutation in this gene can lead to blindness. Pax6
mutations also cause blindness in mice and fruit flies. Describe how
scientists could have tested the idea that Pax6 plays a role in eye
development in all three species.
(5 marks)
3 Consider the statement.
All Hox genes are homeobox genes but not all homeobox genes are
Hox genes.
Discuss the validity of this statement.
(5 marks)
517
19
Chapter 19 Practice questions
2 a The diagram shows a family's history of
Huntington's disease.
generation 1
generation 2
generation 3
IB
O
generation 4
C
0
C
Practice questions
1 The common groundsel, Senecio vulgaris, is a
weed that is often found in large numbers on
cultivated land. It was the first plant species
to develop resistance to triazine herbicides.
This resistance is the result of a gene
mutation in the chloroplast DNA.
Since its first appearance, triazine resistance
has spread very rapidly in groundsel
populations.
a Explain the rapid spread of herbicide
resistance in a weed such as groundsel.
(5 marks)
b DNA was extracted from the chloroplasts
of triazine-susceptible and triazine-
resistant groundsel plants. Equivalent
lengths of DNA, including the site of the
mutation, were isolated from each extract
and then treated with the restriction
enzyme Mael prior to electrophoresis.
The resulting electrophoresis gel, after
staining the DNA, is shown in the diagram.
DNA from DNA from
triazine-susceptible triazine-resistant
plants
plants
wella
length of DNA
(number of base pairs)
154
123
electrophoresis
key: male with HD male without HD
female with HD O female without HD
Explain how the diagram provides
evidence that Huntington's disease results
from the inheritance of an autosomal
dominant allele.
(3 marks)
b Genetic screening for Huntington's disease
can be carried out, using a process similar
to genetic fingerprinting, to find the
length of a repeated triplet, or 'stutter', in
an allele.
DNA from individuals A, B and C from
the family shown in the diagram was
analysed.
The resulting banding patterns are shown
in the diagram.
gel
range of
lengths of
abnormal
allele
range of
lengths of
normal allele
direction of
movement of
DNA fragments
A
B
C
(i) State, giving a reason, whether the
mutation giving resistance to triazine
is a deletion, a substitution or an
addition.
(2 marks)
(ii) Explain the difference in banding
pattern between DNA from triazine-
susceptible and triazine-resistant
plants.
(iii) Suggest one way in which the
mutation could give resistance to
triazine.
(2 marks)
OCR 2805/02 2010
Explain why the DNA of the following
bands in the diagram are not the same
length:
(i) the three normal alleles (1 mark)
(ii) the three abnormal alleles. (1 mark)
OCR 2805/02 2008
(2 marks)
518
MODULE 6
Genetics, evolution, and ecosystems
Chapters in this module
Demonstrate knowledge, understanding, and application of:
19 Genetics of living systems
20 Patterns of inheritance and variation
21 Manipulating genomes
22 Cloning and biotechnology
23 Ecosystems
24 Populations and sustainability
Introduction
In this module you will learn how genes regulate debate. You will find out how genomes are sequenced
and control cell function. This will lead on
as well as how DNA profiling is used in forensics and
to the study of heredity, evolution, and DNA to determine the risk of certain diseases.
manipulation. Finally, you will consider the
Cloning and biotechnology explores how
impacts of human activities on the natural
farmers and growers exploit natural vegetative
environment and biodiversity.
propagation in the production of uniform crops,
Genetics of living systems introduces how the as well as the role of scientists in the production
genetic control of metabolic reactions determines of artificial plant and animal clones. The use of
an organism's growth, development, and function. microorganisms in biotechnology to produce food,
This also includes looking at the effects of gene drugs, and other products is also studied.
mutations on protein function.
Ecosystems are dynamic and influenced by both
Patterns of inheritance and variation allows you biotic and abiotic factors. You will study the complex
to study how genetic and environmental factors interactions which occur between organisms
contribute to variation within a population. Over and their environment as well as finding out how
a prolonged period, organisms can change so materials are passed on and recycled.
significantly that new species have formed, whereas
Populations and sustainability investigates
others have become extinct. Humans can use
the factors that determine population size and
artificial selection to produce similar changes in
the economic, social, and ethical reasons why
plants and animals.
ecosystems may need to be managed. This
Manipulating genomes has many potential includes looking at how biological resources can
benefits such as the treatment of disease but the be used sustainably to support an increasing
implications of genetic techniques are of public human population.
504
GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
19.1 Mutations and variation
Specification reference: 6.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
types of gene mutations
and their possible effects
on protein production and
function.
Gene mutations (when DNA goes wrong)
A mutation is a change in the sequence of bases in DNA. Protein
synthesis can be disrupted if the mutation occurs within a gene. The
change in sequence is caused by the substitution, deletion, or
insertion of one or more nucleotides (or base pairs) within a gene.
If only one nucleotide is affected it is called a point mutation.
The substitution of a single nucleotide changes the codon in which it
occurs. If the new codon codes for a different amino acid this will lead to
a change in the primary structure of the protein. The degenerate nature
of the genetic code may mean however that the new codon still codes for
the same amino acid leading to no change in the protein synthesised.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 3.9, DNA
replication and the genetic code
to remind you of why the genetic
code is degenerate.
The position and involvement of the amino acid in R group
interactions within the protein will determine the impact of the new
amino acid on the function of the protein. For example, if the protein
is an enzyme and the amino acid plays an important role within the
active site, then the protein may no longer act as a biological catalyst.
normal DNA sequence:
AGT, CGA, TAG
codon l codon 2 codon 3
point mutations:
base substitution (
A
substituted instead of C
in codon 2):
AGT, AGA TAG
codon 1 codon 2 codon 3
The insertion or deletion of a nucleotide, or nucleotides,
leads to a frameshift mutation (Figure 1). The triplet code
means that sequences of bases are transcribed (or read)
consecutively in non-overlapping groups of three. This is
the reading frame of a sequence of bases. Each group of
three bases corresponds to one amino acid. The addition or
deletion of a nucleotide moves, or shifts, the reading frame
of the sequence of bases. This will change every successive
codon from the point of mutation.
ATG TCG ATA
codon 1 codon 2 codon 3
frameshift mutations:
insertion
(T inserted before G
in codon 1):
deletion
(G deleted from
codon 1):
ATC, GAT, AGC
A
codon 1 codon 2 codon 3
The same effect is seen however many nucleotides are
added or deleted, unless the number of nucleotides changed
is a multiple of three. Multiples of three correspond to full
codons and therefore the reading frame will not be changed
- but the protein formed will still be affected as a new
amino acid is added.
A Figure 1 The diagram shows the
effect of different point mutations on
codons and sequences of codons
Effects of different mutations
No effect - there is no effect on the phenotype of an organism
because normally functioning proteins are still synthesised.
Damaging - the phenotype of an organism is affected in a negative
way because proteins are no longer synthesised or proteins
synthesised are non-functional. This can interfere with one, or
more, essential processes.
506
Knowledge and understanding checklist
From your Key Stage 4 study you should be able to answer the following
questions. Work through each point, using your Key Stage 4 notes and the
support available on Kerboodle.
O Describe the process of mitosis in growth, including the cell cycle.
Explain how some abiotic and biotic factors affect communities.
Describe the importance of interdependence and competition in a community.
O Explain the role of microorganisms in the cycling of materials through
an ecosystem.
Describe human interactions within ecosystems and explain their impact
on biodiversity.
Explain some of the benefits and challenges of maintaining local and global
biodiversity.
U Explain the following terms - genome, gamete, chromosome, gene, allele/
variant, dominant, recessive, homozygous, heterozygous, genotype, and
phenotype.
Explain single gene inheritance and predict the results of single gene crosses.
State that there is usually extensive genetic variation within a population of
a species.
Explain the impact of the selective breeding of food plants and
domesticated animals.
O Describe the main steps in the process of genetic engineering.
Maths skills checklist
In this module, you will need to use the following maths skills. You can find
support for these skills on kerboodle and through MyMaths.
Ratios. You will need to use phenotypic ratios to identify linkage and epistasis.
U Chi-squared test. You will need to use the chi-squared test to determine the
significance of the difference between observed and expected results.
U Hardy-Weinberg principle. You will need to use the Hardy-Weinberg
principle to calculate allele frequencies in populations.
Correlation coefficient. You will need to use
this test to consider the relationship between
two sets of data. This will determine if and how 6. MyMaths.co.uk
Bringing Maths Alive
the data are correlated.
505
19
GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
YVOIRS.
3 Homeobox genes show astonishing similarity
across widely different species of animal,
from fruit flies, which are insects, to mice and
humans, which are mammals. The sequences
of these genes have remained relatively
unchanged throughout evolutionary history
and the same genes control embryonic
development in flies and mammals.
a State what is meant by a homeobox gene.
(2 marks)
b Homeobox genes show 'astonishing
similarity across widely different species
of animal'.
Explain why there has been very little
change by mutation in these genes.
(2 marks)
Frogs reproduce by laying eggs in water,
each egg develops into a tadpole, which
has external gills to extract oxygen from
the water, and a tail to help it swim. The
tadpole gradually changes into an adult
frog as it grows. During this time its gills
and tail disappear.
List two cellular processes that must occur
during the development of a tadpole into
a frog.
(2 marks)
d Name another kingdom of organisms,
other than animals, that have similar
homeotic genes.
(1 mark)
OCR F215 2012
4 An enhancer of a regulatory gene responsible
for limb development in mammals, called the
sonic hedgehog gene, is located in the intron
of a neighbouring gene. This regulatory gene
was first investigated using Drosophila -
genetically modified flies. Without this gene
the fruit flies grew small projections (known
as denticles) all over their bodies.
Point mutations in the enhancer sequence for
this gene result in polydactyly, extra fingers
or toes.
The photograph and X-ray show a child's foot
with polydactyl - a deformity in which more
than the usual number of digits are present.
The condition is genetic in origin, and in
most cases causes no harm. The extra digits
are often underdeveloped (those at lower left
in this case), and if removed surgically soon
after birth cause no long term complications.
a Explain how an enhancer works.
(2 marks)
b State the meaning of the term intron.
(1 mark)
c Describe what is meant by a point
mutation.
(2 marks)
Explain why the sonic hedgehog gene
is an example of a Hox gene. (2 marks)
e The sonic hedgehog gene is usually
expressed in cells close to tissue that
eventually develops into the small fingers
or toes.
Suggest how different rates of
transcription of this gene leads to the
formation of fingers with different sizes
and shapes.
(3 marks)
519
GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
19
Hox genes
Hox genes (often used interchangeably with homeobox genes) are
one group of homeobox genes that are only present in animals. They
are responsible for the correct positioning of body parts. In animals the
Hox genes are found in gene clusters – mammals have four clusters on
different chromosomes.
The order in which the genes appear along the chromosome is the
order in which their effects are expressed in the organism. Human
beings have 39 Hox genes in total that are all believed to have arisen
from one ancient homeobox gene by duplication and accumulated
mutations over time.
The layout of living organisms
Body plans are usually represented as cross-sections through the
organism showing the fundamental arrangement of tissue layers.
Diploblastic animals have two primary tissue layers and triploblastic
animals have three primary tissue layers.
A common feature of animals is that they are segmented, that is, the
rings of a worm or the less obvious back bone of vertebrates. These
segments have multiplied over time and are specialised to perform
different functions. Hox genes in the head control the development of
mouthparts and Hox genes in the thorax control the development of
wings, limbs, or ribs.
The individual vertebrae and associated structures have all developed
from segments in the embryo called somites. The somites are directed
by Hox genes to develop in a particular way depending on their
position in the sequence.
Figure 4 Body layout from head to tail in both flies and human beings is
controlled by Hox genes. The fly has a set of eight Hox genes but human beings
have four comparable sets
515
19
GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
Glutamic acid is a hydrophilic amino acid but valine is a hydrophobic
amino acid. When the partial pressure of oxygen is low, and haemoglobin
is dissociated from oxygen, the hydrophobic valine amino acids bind to
hydrophobic regions on adjacent haemoglobin molecules.
The aggregation of haemoglobin molecules deforms the shape of
erythrocytes causing them to become sickle shaped. The erythrocytes
are less flexible and have difficulty moving through capillaries resulting in
reduced oxygen delivery to tissues, which causes anaemia.
In homozygous individuals, there are two copies of the mutant alleles
present. Heterozygous individuals only get mild symptoms of the condition,
but are resistant to malaria. Hundreds of millions of people get malaria each
year with over a million fatal cases.
1 Evaluate the benefits of being heterozygous for sickle cell anaemia.
2 Explain how the change of one amino acid in haemoglobin could
reduce the oxygen-carrying ability of the blood.
Chromosome mutations
Gene mutations occur in single genes or sections of DNA whereas
chromosome mutations affect the whole chromosome or number of
chromosomes within a cell. They can also be caused by mutagens and
normally occur during meiosis. As with gene mutations, the mutations
can be silent but often lead to developmental difficulties.
Changes in chromosome structure include:
Synoptic link
Deletion - a section of chromosome breaks off and is lost within
the cell.
Duplication - sections get duplicated on a chromosome.
Translocation - a section of one chromosome breaks off and joins
another non-homologous chromosome.
Inversion - a section of chromosome breaks off, is reversed, and
then joins back onto the chromosome.
To remind yourself of the process
of meiosis, look back at Topic 6.3,
Meiosis.
Summary questions
1 The development of lactose tolerance is thought to have spread over
approximately 20 000 years, which in evolutionary terms is very quick.
Explain why the percentage of adults with the ability to digest lactose
increased at such a rate.
2 Outline why the majority of mutations do not have an influence
phenotype.
(2 marks)
3 Discuss why beneficial mutations are rare and suggest a process that
beneficial mutations underpin.
(4 marks)
509
.
19.2 Control of gene expression
Specification reference: 6.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the regulatory mechanisms
that control gene expression
at the transcriptional level,
post-transcriptional level, and
post-translational level.
Gene regulation
Enzymes which are necessary for reactions present in metabolic pathways
like respiration are constantly required, and the genes that code for these
are called housekeeping genes. Protein-based hormones (required for the
growth and development of an organism or enzymes) are only required
by certain cells at certain times to carry out a short-lived response. They
are coded for by tissue-specific genes.
The entire genome of an organism is present in every prokaryotic
cell, or eukaryotic cell that contains a nucleus. This includes genes
not required by that cell so the expression of genes and the rate of
synthesis of protein products like enzymes and hormones has to be
regulated. Genes can be turned on or off, and the rate of product
synthesis increased or decreased depending on demand.
Bacteria are able to respond to changes in the environment because of
gene regulation. Expressing genes only when the products are needed
also prevents vital resources being wasted.
Gene regulation is fundamentally the same in both prokaryotes
and eukaryotes. However, the stimuli that cause changes in gene
expression and the responses produced are more complex in eukaryotes.
Multicellular organisms not only have to respond to changes in the
external environment but also the internal environment. Gene regulation
is required for cells to specialise and work in a coordinated way.
There are a number of different ways in which genes are regulated,
categorised by the level at which they operate:
Transcriptional - genes can be turned on or off
Post-transcriptional - mRNA can be modified which regulates
translation and the types of proteins produced
Translational - translation can be stopped or started
Post-translational - proteins can be modified after synthesis which
changes their functions.
•
Transcriptional control
There are a number of mechanisms that can affect the transcription
of genes.
Chromatin remodelling
As you have already learnt, DNA is a very long molecule and has to
be wound around proteins called histones in eukaryotic cells, in order
to be packed into the nucleus of a cell. The resulting DNA/protein
complex is called a chromatin.
Heterochromatin is tightly wound DNA causing chromosomes to be
visible during cell division whereas euchromatin is loosely wound
DNA present during interphase. The transcription of genes is not possible
when DNA is tightly wound because RNA polymerase cannot access the
510
19
19.3 Body plans
Symmetry
The body shape of most animals shows symmetry.
Radial symmetry is seen in diploblastic animals like jellyfish. They
have no left or right sides, only a top and a bottom.
• Bilateral symmetry which is seen in most animals means the
organisms have both left and right sides and a head and tail rather
than just a top and bottom.
• Asymmetry is seen in sponges which have no lines of symmetry.
morphogenetic apoptosis
acting as a stone sculptor
elimination of material
by apoptosis
Mitosis and apoptosis
Mitosis, which results in cell division and proliferation, and apoptosis
(Figure 6), which is programmed cell death, are both essential in
shaping organisms.
The role of mitosis is to increase the number of cells leading to growth.
The role of apoptosis is not so immediately obvious. Consider how a
sculptor works to give shape to a block of wood or stone. The shape
is revealed as material is removed bit by bit. This is one of the ways in
which apoptosis shapes different body parts - by removing unwanted
cells and tissues. Cells undergoing apoptosis can also release chemical
signals which stimulate mitosis and cell proliferation leading to the
remodelling of tissues. A sculptor working with clay will often add and
remove clay during the reshaping process. Hox genes regulate both
mitosis and apoptosis.
8
OOOG
eos
NOVA
new shape revealed
nucleus condensing
cell shrinkage
A Figure 5 The development of the hand
is an example of morphogenetic apoptosis.
The red area shows how apoptosis is used
to sculpt the individual fingers
+ nucleus
blebs
en
Synoptic link
You learnt about mitosis in
Topic 6.2, Mitosis.
nucleus fragmenting
apoptotic body
apoptotic bodies
engulfed by phagocyte
A Figure 6 The process of apoptosis
Factors affecting the expression of regulatory genes
The expression of regulatory genes can be influenced by the
environment, both internal and external. Stress can be defined
as the condition produced when the homeostatic balance within
an organism is upset. This can be due to external factors such as
516
19
19.1 Mutations and variation
Nonsense mutations
Nonsense mutations result in a codon becoming a stop
codon instead of coding for an amino acid. The result is a
shortened protein being synthesised which is normally
non-functional. These mutations normally have negative
or harmful effects on phenotypes.
mutation is less severe. In contrast, a non-conservative
mutation is when the new amino acid coded for has
different properties to the original, this is more likely to
have an effect on protein structure, and may cause disease.
Missense mutations
Missense mutations result in the incorporation of an
incorrect amino acid (or amino acids) into the primary
structure when the protein is synthesised. The result
depends on the role the amino acid plays in the structure
and therefore function of the protein synthesised.
The mutation could be silent, beneficial, or harmful. A
conservative mutation occurs when the amino acid change
leads to an amino acid being coded for which has similar
properties to the original, this means the effect of the
1 Different mutations have a range of effects on
proteins synthesised. These are categorised as
follows:
Amorph - mutation that results in the loss of
function of a protein
Hypomorph - mutation that results in a reduction
of function of a protein
Hypermorph - mutation that results in a gain in
function of a protein.
Suggest whether amorphic mutations result in
dominant or recessive alleles. Give the reason(s)
for your answer.
Table 2 Point mutations can be silent, nonsense, or missense depending on their effect on the primary
structure of the protein coded for by the gene
Point mutations
Level where
effect occurs
No mutations
Silent
Nonsense
Missense
conservative
non-conservative
DNA level
TTC
ATC
TCC
TGC
TTT
AAA
mRNA level
AAG
UAG
AGG
ACG
protein level
Lys
Lys
STOP
Argi
Thr
Beneficial mutations
The ability to digest lactose, the sugar present in milk, is thought to be
the result of a relatively recent mutation. The majority of mammals
in the world become lactose intolerant after they cease to suckle. The
ability to digest lactose is found primarily in European populations who
are more likely to farm cattle. The ability to drink milk and process
lactose as an adult helps prevent diseases such as osteoporosis - this
could also have prevented individuals with the mutation from starving
during famines. This mutation appears to have arisen spontaneously
more than once – it has also been found in people in East Africa.
Sickle-cell anaemia
Sickle-cell anaemia is a blood disorder where erythrocytes develop
abnormally. The disorder is cause by a mutation in the gene coding for
haemoglobin. There is a substitution of just one base. Thymine replaces
adenine, making the sixth amino acid valine instead of glutamic acid on the
beta haemoglobin chain.
508
19.3 Body plans
Specification reference: 6.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the genetic control of the
development of body plans in
different organisms
the importance of mitosis and
apoptosis as mechanisms
controlling the development
of body form.
Body plans
Living organisms come in all shapes and sizes from tulips to mosquitoes
to humans. It is the same small group of genes, however, that control
the growth and development of these vastly different living forms.
The regulation of the pattern of
anatomical development is called
morphogenesis.
These genes were discovered by
scientists investigating strange
mutations observed in fruit flies
such as legs on the head in place of
antennae or extra pairs of wings.
Fruit flies are small flies belonging
to the genus Drosophila that feed
and reproduce on rotting fruit.
They are small, easy to keep, and
have a short life cycle so have
always been a popular choice for
use in genetic studies.
Figure 1 Coloured scanning electron
micrograph of the head of a mutant fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster with leg
antennae, approx 58 magnification
A Figure 2 False-colour scanning
electron micrograph of a mutant fruit
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, with four
wings. The normal fly has one pair of
wings. Fruit flies have been used for
many years in genetic research because
it is easy to raise in large numbers in
the laboratory, reproduces rapidly, and
many of its mutations are easy to see
under a low-powered microscope, approx
x9.8 magnification
Homeobox genes
Homeobox genes are a group of genes which all contain a homeobox.
The homeobox is a section of DNA 180 base pairs long coding for a part
of the protein 60 amino acids long that is highly conserved (very similar)
in plants, animals, and fungi. This part of the protein, a homeodomain,
binds to DNA and switches other genes on or off. Therefore, homeobox
genes are regulatory genes.
The common ancestor of the mouse and human is thought to have
lived about 60 million years ago. Mutations have been accumulating
ever since and evolution has led to two very different organisms.
Many of the homeobox genes present in the mouse and human,
however, still have identical nucleotide sequences.
Pax6 is one of the homeobox
genes. When mutated it causes
a form of blindness (due to
underdevelopment of the retina)
in humans. Mice and fruit
flies also have this gene and
disruption of the gene causes
blindness in these organisms as
Figure 3 This two-headed calf is an well. These findings suggest that
example of what can go wrong when Pax6 is a gene involved in the
there is a mutation in a regulatory Hox
development of eyes in all three
gene. Although this calf has two heads,
species.
it only has one brain and so the heads
react simultaneously
Synoptic link
You learnt about evolution in
Chapter 10, Classification and
evolution.
514
19
GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
binding of inhibitory proteins to mRNA prevents it binding to
ribosomes and the synthesis of proteins.
activation of initiation factors which aid the binding of mRNA to
ribosomes (the eggs of many organisms produce large quantities of
mRNA which is not required until after fertilisation, at which point
initiation factors are activated).
Protein kinases
Protein kinases are enzymes that catalyse the addition of phosphate
groups to proteins. The addition of a phosphate group changes the
tertiary structure and so the function of a protein. Many enzymes are
activated by phosphorylation. Protein kinases are therefore important
regulators of cell activity. Protein kinases are themselves often
activated by the secondary messenger CAMP.
Study tip
It is important to appreciate the
difference between structural
genes and regulatory genes.
Post-translational control
Post-translational control involves modifications to the proteins that
have been synthesised. This includes the following:
addition of non-protein groups such as carbohydrate chains, lipids,
or phosphates
modifying amino acids and the formation of bonds such as
disulfide bridges
folding or shortening of proteins.
modification by CAMP - for example, in the lac operon CAMP
binds to the CAMP receptor protein increasing the rate of
transcription of the structural genes.
Summary questions
1 The lac operon if often referred to as being 'leaky' meaning that it is still
transcribed to a limited extent even in the absence of lactose.
a Using your knowledge of how the lac operon works,
explain why this is necessary.
(3 marks)
b Suggest the functions of B-galactosidase and lactose
permease synthesised by the lac operon.
(3 marks)
2 Another example of gene regulation in prokaryotes is the trp operon.
This operon codes for the production of tryptophan, an essential amino
acid for the bacterium E. coli. When tryptophan is available in the
environment the structural genes in the trp operon are not expressed.
Suggest a mechanism for the genetic regulation of this operon. (5 marks)
3 Using your knowledge of enzymes, explain how enzyme
cofactors could play a role in gene regulation.
(4 marks)
513
GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
CS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
19
Beneficial – very rarely a protein is synthesised that results in a
new and useful characteristic in the phenotype. For example, a
mutation in a protein present in the cell surface membranes of
human cells means that the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
cannot bind and enter these cells. People with this mutation are
immune to infection from HIV.
Causes of mutations
Mutations can occur spontaneously, often during DNA replication,
but the rate of mutation is increased by mutagens. A mutagen is a
chemical, physical, or biological agent which causes mutations (Table 1).
The loss of a purine base (depurination) or a pyrimidine base
(depyrimidination) often occurs spontaneously. The absence of a base
can lead to the insertion of an incorrect base through complementary
base pairing during DNA replication.
Free radicals, which are oxidising agents, can affect the structures
of nucleotides and also disrupt base pairing during DNA replication.
Antioxidants, such as vitamins A, C, and E (found in fruit and
vegetables), are known anticarcinogens because of their ability to
negate the effects of free radicals.
Table 1 Summary of some of the main mutagens and what they do
Physical
mutagens
Chemical
mutagens
ionizing break one or both DNA strands - some breaks
radiations can be repaired but mutations can occur in the
such as X-rays process
chemically alter bases in DNA such as converting
deaminating
cytosine to uracil in DNA, changing the base
agents
sequence
methyl or ethyl groups are attached to bases
alkylating
resulting in the incorrect pairing of bases during
agents
replication
Biological
agents
base analogs
incorporated into DNA in place of the usual base
during replication, changing the base sequence
viruses
viral DNA may insert itself into a genome,
changing the base sequence
Effects of mutation
Silent mutations
The vast majority of mutations are silent (or neutral)
which means they do not change any proteins, or the
activity of any proteins synthesised. Therefore, they have
no effect on the phenotype of an organism. They can
occur in the non-coding regions of DNA (introns) or code
for the same amino acid due to the degenerate nature of
the genetic code. They may also result in changes to the
primary structure but do not change the overall structure
or function of the proteins synthesised.
507
19
19.2 Control of gene expression
The repressor protein is constantly produced and binds to an area called
the operator, which is also close to the structural genes. The binding
of this protein prevents RNA polymerase binding to DNA and beginning
transcription. This is called down regulation. The section of DNA that
is the binding site for RNA polymerase is called the promoter.
When lactose is present, it binds to the repressor protein causing it to
change shape so it can no longer bind to the operator. As a result RNA
polymerase can bind to the promoter, the three structural genes are
transcribed, and the enzymes are synthesised.
Synoptic link
You first encountered CAMP when
looking at its role in the mechanism
of ADH action in Topic 15.6, The
kidney and osmoregulation.
Role of cyclic AMP
The binding of RNA polymerase still only results in a relatively slow
rate of transcription that needs to be increased or up-regulated to
produce the required quantity of enzymes to metabolise lactose
efficiently. This is achieved by the binding of another protein, CAMP
receptor protein (CRP), that is only possible when CRP is bound to
CAMP (a secondary messenger that you are already familiar with).
The transport of glucose into an E. coli cell decreases the levels of CAMP,
reducing the transcription of the genes responsible for the metabolism
of lactose. If both glucose and lactose are present then it will still be
glucose, the preferred respiratory substrate, that is metabolised.
Post-transcriptional/pre-translational control
RNA processing
The product of transcription is a precursor molecule, pre-mRNA. This
is modified forming mature mRNA before it can bind to a ribosome
and code for the synthesis of the required protein.
exon
intron
DNA
A cap (a modified nucleotide) is added to the 5' end and a tail (a long chain
of adenine nucleotides) is added to the 3' end. These both help to stabilise
mRNA and delay degradation in the cytoplasm. The cap also aids binding of
mRNA to ribosomes. Splicing also occurs where the RNA is cut at specific
points - the introns (non-coding DNA) are removed and the exons (coding
DNA) are joined together. Both processes occur within the nucleus.
pre-mRNA
mRNA
RNA editing
The nucleotide sequence of some mRNA molecules can also be
changed through base addition, deletion, or substitution. These have
the same effect as point mutations and result in the synthesis of
different proteins which may have different functions. This increases
the range of proteins that can be produced from a single mRNA
molecule or gene.
tail
cap
A Figure 2 This diagram summarises
the modification of a pre-mRNA molecule
Translational control
These following mechanisms regulate the process of protein synthesis:
degradation of mRNA – the more resistant the molecule the longer
it will last in the cytoplasm, that is, a greater quantity of protein
synthesised.
512
GENETICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
19
Synoptic link
genes. The genes in euchromatin, however, can be freely transcribed.
Protein synthesis does not occur during cell division but during
interphase between cell divisions. This is a simple form of regulation that
ensures the proteins necessary for cell division are synthesised in time.
It also prevents the complex and energy-consuming process of protein
synthesis from occurring when cells are actually dividing.
You learnt about the structure of
DNA in Topic 3.9, DNA replication
and the genetic code and in
Topic 6.1, Cell cycle.
Histone modification
DNA coils around histones because they are positively charged and
DNA is negatively charged. Histones can be modified to increase or
decrease the degree of packing (or condensation).
The addition of acetyl groups (acetylation) or phosphate groups
(phosphorylation) reduces the positive charge on the histones
(making them more negative) and this causes DNA to coil less tightly,
allowing certain genes to be transcribed. The addition of methyl
groups (methylation) makes the histones more hydrophobic so they
bind more tightly to each other causing DNA to coil more tightly and
preventing transcription of genes.
Epigenetics is a term that is increasingly used to describe this control
of gene expression by the modification of DNA. It is sometimes used to
include all of the different ways in which gene expression is regulated.
Lac operon
regulatory gene operator promoter
An operon is a group of genes that are
repressor protein
under the control of the same regulatory
mechanism and are expressed at the same
time. Operons are far more common in
RNA
prokaryotes than eukaryotes owing to
polymerase
the smaller and simpler structure of their
genomes. They are also a very efficient way
of saving resources because if certain gene
regulatory gene operator promoter
products are not needed, then all of the
repressor protein
genes involved in their production can be
lactose
switched off.
Glucose is easier to metabolise and is the lactose
RNA
preferred respiratory substrate of Escherichia
polymerase
coli and many other bacteria. If glucose is
in short supply, lactose can be used as a
respiratory substrate. Different enzymes are
needed to metabolise lactose.
regulatory gene operator promoter
The lac operon is a group of three genes,
RNA
lacz, lacy, and lacA, involved in the
polymerase
transcription
metabolism of lactose. They are structural
genes as they code for three enzymes
(B-galactosidase, lactose permease, and
repressor protein
structural genes
transacetylase) and they are transcribed
lactose
onto a single long molecule of mRNA. A
regulatory gene, laci, is located near to the Figure 1 A repressor protein coded for by a regulatory gene binds to the
operon and codes for a repressor protein
operator and prevents the binding of RNA polymerase, preventing transcription
that prevents the transcription of the
of the structural genes
structural genes in the absence of lactose (Figure 1).
511
