22
22.4 Microorganisms and biotechnology
Bacteria - feed
on lactose in milk,
changing the texture
and taste, and inhibiting
the growth of bacteria
which make milk go off.
Cheese-
making
The milk is pasteurised (heated to 95 °C for 20 seconds to kill off most natural
bacteria) and homogenised (the fat droplets evenly distributed through the milk).
It is mixed with bacterial cultures and sometimes chymosin enzyme and kept
until the milk separates into solid curds and liquid whey.
• For cottage cheese, the curds are separated from the whey, packaged, and sold.
• For most cheese, the curds are cut and cooked in the whey then strained
through draining moulds or cheesecloth. The whey is used for animal feeds.
The curds are put into steel or wooden drums and may be pressed. They are
left to dry, mature, and ripen before eating as the bacteria continue to act for
anything from a few weeks to several years.
Bacteria - often
Lactobacillus bulgaricus
(forms ethanal)
and Streptococcus
thermophilus (forms
lactic acid). Both
produce extracellular
polymers that give
yoghurt its smooth,
thick texture.
Skimmed milk powder is added to milk and the mixture is pasteurised,
homogenised, and cooled to about 47 °C.
• The milk is mixed with a 1:1 ratio of Lactobacillus bulgaricus and Streptococcus
thermophilus and incubated at around 45 °C for 4-5 hours.
• At the end of the fermentation, the yoghurt may be put into cartons at a temperature
of around 10 °C as plain yoghurt or mixed with previously sterilised fruit.
• Thick-set yoghurts are mixed and ferment in the pot.
• Yoghurt has a shelf-life of about 19 days if stored at 2-3 °C.
Yoghurt-
making
Direct food production
People have eaten fungi for thousands of years in the form of a
wide variety of mushrooms. In recent times, facing potential protein
shortages around the world, scientists are developing more ways of
using microorganisms to directly produce protein you can eat. It is
known as single-cell protein or SCP.
The best known SCP is Quorn TM This is made of the fungus
Fusarium venetatum, a single celled fungus that is grown in large
fermenters using glucose syrup as a food source (You will learn
more about fermenters in Topic 22.7. Culturing microorganisms
on an industrial scale). The microorganisms are combined with
albumen (egg white) and then compressed and formed into meat
substitutes. QuornTM is not only suitable for vegetarians, it is also
a healthy choice as it is high in protein and low in fat. People are
very conservative in their food choices and when the new food was
launched, no mention was made of the fungi used to produce it.
Using the term mycoprotein meant most people did not recognise
what it was made of. However a combination of good marketing
and a good product meant that people tried Quorn TM and liked it,
and it has been internationally successful as a novel protein food.
Other attempts to make proteins from microorganisms have not yet
been as successful. Yeasts, algae, and bacteria can be used to grow
proteins that match animal proteins found in meat as well as plant
proteins. They can be grown on almost anything, are relatively cheap
and low in fat, yet none of the alternative protein sources has proved
successful so far. People have many reservations about eating food
grown on waste. Increasingly single celled proteins are being used to
588
22
22.3 Cloning in animals
Artificial twinning
After an egg is fertilised, it divides to form a ball of cells. Each of these
individual cells is totipotent - it has the potential to form an entire new
animal. As the cells continue to divide, the embryo becomes a hollow
ball of cells. Soon after this the embryo can no longer divide successfully.
In natural twinning, an early embryo splits and two foetuses go on
to develop from the two halves of the divided embryo. In artificial
twinning the same thing happens, but the split in the early embryo
is produced manually. In fact, the early embryo may be split into
more than two pieces and results in a number of identical offspring.
Artificial twinning, like embryo transfer which preceded it, is used
by the farming community to produce the maximum offspring from
particularly good dairy or beef cattle or sheep.
The stages of artificial twinning in cattle can be summarised as follows:
• A cow with desirable traits is treated with hormones so she super-
ovulates, releasing more mature ova than normal.
The ova may be fertilised naturally, or by artificial insemination, by
a bull with particularly good traits. The early embryos are gently
flushed out of the uterus.
Alternatively, the mature eggs are removed and fertilised by top-
quality bull semen in the lab.
Usually before or around day six, when the cells are still totipotent,
the cells of the early embryo are split to produce several smaller
embryos, each capable of growing on to form a healthy full-term calf.
Each of the split embryos is grown in the lab for a few days to
ensure all is well before it is implanted into a surrogate mother.
Each embryo is implanted into a different mother as single
pregnancies carry fewer risks than twin pregnancies.
The embryos develop into foetuses and are born normally, so a
number of identical cloned animals are produced by different mothers.
20 early embryo from cow
In pigs, a number of cloned embryos
od and bull with desirable traits
must be introduced into each mother
pig. This is because they naturally
embryo split into
produce a litter of piglets, and the
totipotent cells
body may reject and reabsorb a
single foetus.
each totipotent cell
develops into an embryo
This technology makes it possible
to greatly increase the numbers of
embryos transferred offspring produced by the animals
to surrogate mothers
with the best genetic stock. Some
of the embryos may be frozen. This
allows the success of a particular
animal to be assessed and, if the stock
identical cloned
is good, remaining identical embryos
offspring
can be implanted and brought to term.
A Figure 2 Artificial twinning in cows
it i
582
22.3 Cloning in animals
Specification reference: 6.2.1
Cloning is a natural part of the reproductive cycle in many plants.
Perhaps surprisingly, it is not uncommon in many animal species and
even occurs in human beings.
Natural animal cloning
Natural cloning is common in invertebrate animals. Although it is less
common in vertebrates, it still occurs in the form of twinning.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ natural clones in animal
species
how artificial clones in
animals can be produced by
artificial embryo twinning or
by enucleation and somatic
cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)
→ the arguments for and against
artificial cloning in animals.
Cloning in invertebrates
Natural cloning in invertebrates can take several forms. Some animals,
such as starfish, can regenerate entire animals from fragments of
the original if they are damaged. Flatworms and sponges fragment
and form new identical animals as part of their normal reproductive
process, all clones of the original. Hydra produce small 'buds' on the
side of their body which develop into genetically identical clones.
In some insects, females can produce offspring without mating.
Scientists are increasingly finding differences between the mother and
daughters, however, suggesting that as a result of high mutation rates
the offspring are not true clones.
Cloning in vertebrates
The main form of vertebrate cloning is the formation of monozygotic
twins (identical twins). The early embryo splits to form two
separate embryos. No one is sure of the trigger which causes this to
happen. The frequency at which identical twins occur varies between
species. For example, domestic cattle rarely if ever produce identical
twins naturally, while the incidence in natural human pregnancies
is around 3 per 1000. When monozygotic twins are born, although
genetically identical, they may look different as a result of differences
in their position and nutrition in the uterus.
Figure 1 The small Hydra is a
clone of the parent and will eventually
separate and live independently
Some female amphibians and reptiles will produce offspring when no
male is available. The offspring are often male rather than female, so
they are not clones of their mother, yet all of their genetic material
arises from her.
Artificial clones in animals
It is relatively easy to produce artificial clones of some invertebrates -
liquidise a sponge or chop up a starfish and new animals will
regenerate from most of the fragments. It is much more difficult to
produce artificial clones of vertebrates, especially mammals. However,
two methods are now used widely in the production of high-quality
farm animals and in the development of genetically engineered
animals for pharming.
Synoptic link
You learnt about pharming in
Topic 21.5, Gene technology and
ethics.
581
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
22
T
Extra microorganisms
The conditions which most microorganisms need to grow include
a relatively low temperature, a supply of oxygen and food, and
the removal of waste gases. They provide their own catalysts in
the form of enzymes. This makes bioprocesses relatively cheap
compared to the high temperatures and pressures and expensive
catalysts often needed in non-biological industrial processes.
Indirect food production
Microorganisms are widely used in biotechnological processes to make
food such as bread, yogurt, and cheese. The microorganisms have
an indirect effect - it is their actions on other food that is important,.
When you eat bread you are mainly eating flour, when you eat
yoghurt or cheese it is mainly milk.
Sometimes microorganisms are used
in the same biotechnological process
in more than one way. Traditionally
bacteria are used in cheesemaking
(Table 1) and proteolytic enzymes
are also added to the milk to help
form curds and whey. Originally
these came from rennet, a substance
extracted from the stomachs of
calves, cows, and pigs containing
the enzyme chymosin. In modern
cheesemaking, the chymosin used
comes mainly from microorganisms
- either from fungal sources or GM
bacteria.
The advantages of using microorganisms in this way are all of the
ones listed previously as advantages of using microorganisms in
biotechnology generally. There are few disadvantages to using
microorganisms indirectly in the production of human foods. If the
conditions are not ideal (e.g., too hot or too cold) the microorganisms do
not grow properly and so they do not work efficiently. Conditions that
are ideal for the microorganisms can also be ideal for microorganisms
that cause the food to go off or cause disease and so the processes have
to be sterile. Increasingly the microorganisms used in food production
have been genetically engineered, and some people have ethical issues
with the use of GM organisms, although this is generally much less the
case with microorganisms than with animals and plants.
Suggest three different
advantages of using modern
sources of chymosin.
There are around 900 different types of cheese made around the world.
Some are still made by very small-scale, traditional methods and others
are produced commercially on a very large scale.
Figure 2 Different types of cheeses
Table 1 Examples of microorganisms involved in commercial processes
Process
Baking
Microorganism involved
Yeast - mixed with sugar
and water to respire
aerobically. Carbon
dioxide produced makes
bread rise.
Yeast - respires
anaerobically to
produce ethanol.
Traditional yeasts
ferment at 20-28°C.
GM yeasts ferment at
lower, and therefore
cheaper, temperatures,
and clump together
(flocculate) and sink at
the end of the process
leaving the beer very
clear.
Steps in commercial process
. The active yeast mixture is added to flour and other ingredients. Mixed and left in
warm environment to rise.
• Dough is knocked back (excess air removed), kneaded, shaped, and left to rise again,
• Cooked in a hot oven - the carbon dioxide bubbles expand, so the bread rises more.
Yeast cells are killed during cooking.
Malting - barley germinates producing enzymes that break starch molecules
down to sugars which yeast can use. Seeds then killed by slow heating but
enzyme activity retained to produce malt.
Mashing - the malt is mixed with hot water (55-65 °C) and enzymes break
down starches to produce wort. Hops are added for flavour and antiseptic
qualities. The wort is sterilised and cooled.
Fermentation - wort is inoculated with yeast. Temperature maintained for
optimum anaerobic respiration (fermentation). Eventually yeast is inhibited by
falling pH, build up of ethanol, and lack of oxygen.
• Maturation - the beer is conditioned for 4-29 days at temperatures of 2-6°C in tanks
Finishing - the beer is filtered, pasteurised, and then bottled or canned with the
addition of carbon dioxide
• The alcohol content varies between about 4% and 9%.
Brewing
587
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
22
The callus is divided up and individual cells or clumps from the
callus are transferred to a new culture medium containing a
different mixture of hormones and nutrients which stimulates the
development of tiny, genetically identical plantlets.
• The plantlets are potted into compost where they grow into
small plants.
The young plants are planted out to grow and produce a crop.
The scale of micropropagation is increasing. It now takes place in
bioreactors, effectively making artificial embryo plants to be packaged
in artificial seeds.
A Figure 1 Micropropagation
Advantages and disadvantages of micropropagation
The number of common plants that are largely produced by
micropropagation is growing constantly and includes potatoes, sugar
cane, bananas, cassava, strawberries, grapes, chrysanthemums,
Douglas firs, and orchids. Here are some of the points both for and
against this process
Arguments for micropropagation
A Figure 2 Micropropagation of orchids
means they are no longer only available
to very wealthy people
Micropropagation allows for the rapid production of large
numbers of plants with known genetic make-up which will
yield good crops.
Culturing meristem tissue produces disease-free plants.
It makes it possible to produce viable numbers of plants after
genetic modification of plant cells.
It provides a way of producing very large numbers of new plants
which are seedless and therefore sterile to meet consumer tastes
(e.g., bananas and grapes).
It provides a way of growing plants which are naturally relatively
infertile or difficult to grow from seed (e.g., orchids).
It provides a way of reliably increasing the numbers of rare or
endangered plants.
Arguments against micropropagation
SPECIALE
BANANA
59 LB.
It produces a monoculture - many plants which are genetically
identical - so they are all susceptible to the same diseases or
changes in growing conditions.
It is a relatively expensive process and requires skilled workers.
The explants and plantlets are vulnerable to infection by moulds
and other diseases during the production process.
If the source material is infected with a virus, all of the clones will
also be infected.
In some cases, large numbers of new plants are lost during the
process.
Figure 3 Bananas are the fourth
most important food worldwide - and
the ones we eat are all clones
579
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
SCNT has been relatively unsuccessful so far in increasing the
populations of rare organisms or allowing extinct species to be brought
back to life. For example, scientists have attempted to clone the gaur
and the banteng-both extremely rare breeds of wild cattle. One gaur
calf was born in 2001 and died within a couple of days. Two banteng
calves were born in 2003 - one was deformed and euthanised, the
other grew normally but its natural lifespan was halved. The idea of
restoring extinct organisms is exciting but scientists are increasingly
unconvinced that it will be possible by this method.
Cloning humans
Synoptic link
You learnt about spindle formation
during cell division in Topic 6.1,
Cell cycle.
Scientists have reproduced clones of primates by
artificial twinning but it is proving very difficult to
produce a SCNT clone of a primate.
Part of the problem seems to be that the spindle proteins
needed for cell division in primate cells are sited very
close to the nucleus, so the removal of the nucleus to
produce the enucleated primate ovum also destroys
the mechanism by which the cell divides. This is not a
problem in the ova of many other mammals because the
spindle proteins are more dispersed in the cytoplasm.
In addition, the synchronisation of the stage of the
embryo and the state of the reproductive organs of the
mother have to be exactly attuned in primates - there
seems to be more flexibility in some other mammals.
In recent years scientists have finally produced
embryonic primate stem cell lines by SCNT. This means it
may eventually be possible to develop these potentially
important therapeutic cells from human beings.
In most countries there is strict legislation to prevent
reproductive cloning of human beings, even if the
technical problems of primate cloning are overcome.
A modified version of SCNT has the potential, however,
to produce human embryonic stem cells from an
adult which could produce cells to be used to grow
new tissues for that individual patient. Research in
this process is strictly controlled so it cannot be used
for reproductive cloning - it is known as therapeutic
cloning to make it clear that the end result is not to
reproduce a person. However, this form of SCNT can
potentially make it possible to grow replacement
organs which will not trigger an immune response
in a patient and which will enable us to cure many
currently life-threatening conditions.
Some people claim to have produced a cloned
human baby, although they have never produced
the child and the adult it was cloned from.
1 Explain how this could easily be proved if
scientists were given access to the individuals
2 Suggest why these claims seem very unlikely
to be true.
Summary questions
1 How is artificial twinning different from natural
twinning?
(6 m
3 Primate clones have been produced by artificial
twinning but not, in 2014, by SCNT.
a Explain the similarities in the two processes.
(3 marks)
b Explain the differences between the two
processes.
(6 marks)
2 The evidence suggests that monozygotic twins do not
occur naturally in cattle. Suggest ways in which this
might be investigated.
(2 marks)
Should funding continue for projects attempting
to recreate extinct animals by SCNT? Include an
evaluation of the process in your answer. (6 marks)
585
22.4 Microorganisms and
biotechnology
Specification reference: 6.2.1
The earliest recorded use of microorganisms by people was around
6000 BC when the Sumerians and Babylonians were using yeast to
make beer. By 4000 BC the Egyptians were using yeast to make their
bread rise. These are all examples of the development and use of
biotechnology over several millennia.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the use of microorganisms in
biotechnological processes.
the advantages and
disadvantages of using
microorganisms to make food
for human consumption.
Defining biotechnology
Biotechnology involves applying biological organisms or enzymes to the
synthesis, breakdown, or transformation of materials in the service of
people. It describes a range of processes, from the traditional production
of cheese, yoghurt, wine, bread, and beer to the latest molecular
technologies using DNA manipulation to produce genetically engineered
microorganisms synthesising drugs such as insulin and antibiotics, and the
use of biological systems to remove soil and water pollution in processes
known as bioremediation (Topic 22.5, Microorganisms, medicines, and
bioremediation).
The most commonly used organisms in biotechnology processes
(bioprocesses) are fungi, particularly the yeasts, and bacteria, which
are particularly useful in the newer technologies based around genetic
manipulation.
Figure 1 Yeasts were probably the first
microorganism to be used in biotechnology,
and they are still of immense importance
worldwide today, scanning electron
micrograph approx x3250 magnification
The use of microorganisms
Most biotechnology involves using biological catalysts (enzymes) in a
manufacturing process and the most stable, convenient, and effective
form of the enzymes is often a whole microorganism. Microorganisms
are ideal for a variety of reasons.
There are no welfare issues to consider - all that is needed is the
optimum conditions for growth.
There is an enormous range of microorganisms capable of carrying out
many different chemical syntheses or degradations that can be used.
Genetic engineering allows us to artificially manipulate
microorganisms to carry out synthesis reactions that they would
not do naturally, for example, to produce human insulin.
Microorganisms have a very short life cycle and rapid growth
rate. As a result, given the right conditions of food, oxygen, and
temperature, huge quantities of microorganisms can be produced
in short periods of time.
The nutrient requirements of microorganisms are often very
simple and relatively cheap. Genetic manipulation means we can
modify them so that the microorganisms can utilise materials
which would otherwise be wasted, making the raw materials for
microorganism-controlled syntheses much cheaper than the raw
materials needed for most other industrial processes.
586
22
22.2 Artificial cloning in plants
COS Yes, we have no bananas...
Bananas are now thought to be one of the oldest crops - and possibly
the first to be cloned. A wild banana is full of hard seeds and it is virtually
inedible. A mutation made them parthenocarpic which means they produce
fruit without fertile seeds - which made them good to eat but also made
them sterile. Scientists therefore think that since the dawn of agriculture,
people cloned bananas using natural asexual reproduction to propagate
the plants producing the seedless, tasty fruit. Sweet bananas are widely
eaten in more economically developed countries, whilst plantains (cooking
bananas) are a staple food in many less economically developed countries.
Synoptic link
You learnt about Black Sigatoka
in Topic 12.2, Animal and plant
diseases.
In the early 20th century almost all of the sweet bananas eaten were the
cultivar Gros Michel. Then fungal Panama disease wiped them out in the
major banana growing countries - none of the clones had any resistance
and a new cultivar took over. Cavendish bananas, while apparently not
as tasty as Gros Michel bananas, are resistant to Panama disease. But
Cavendish bananas are also clones. Now another banana disease, Black
Sigatoka, is destroying Cavendish plantations, and is also spreading to other
cooking varieties of bananas.
New biotechnologies for example genetic engineering and micropropagation
offer hope for the future. Genetically engineered strains of bananas with
resistance genes from the original wild fruit could be micropropagated and
used to restock banana plantains across the whole growing region.
1 Gros Michel bananas have been almost entirely lost. Why?
2 How might new technology enable us to retain the Cavendish strain?
3 Discuss how banana culture has changed over the centuries.
Summary questions
1 Make a flow chart to show the main stages in the micropropagation
of plants.
(7 marks)
2 What do you consider the two main advantages of micropropagation
of crop plants? Explain your choices.
(6 marks)
3 a What is the potential of natural cloning for saving important crops
such as the banana against disease? Give arguments for and
against the technique.
(6 marks)
b What is the potential of micropropagation for saving important
crops against disease in contrast to natural cloning? Give
arguments for and against the technique.
(6 marks)
580
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
22.1 Natural cloning in plants
Specification reference: 6.2.1
Asexual reproduction is a form of cloning and it results in offspring
produced by mitosis and known as clones. Clones are usually
genetically identical to both the parent organism and to each other.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ natural clones in plants and
the production of natural
clones for use in horticulture
how to take plant cuttings
as an example of a simple
cloning technique.
Natural cloning
Vegetative propagation, or natural cloning, occurs in many species
of flowering plants. A structure forms which develops into a fully
differentiated new plant, which is genetically identical to the parent.
The new plant may be propagated from the stem, leaf, bud, or root of
the parent, depending on the type of plant, and it eventually becomes
independent from its parent, for example, strawberries and spider plants.
Synoptic link
You learnt about mitosis in
Topic 6.2, Mitosis.
Vegetative propagation often involves perennating organs, which
enables plants to survive adverse conditions. These contain stored
food from photosynthesis and can remain dormant in the soil. They
are often not only a means of asexual reproduction, but also a way
of surviving from one growing season to the next. Natural plant
cloning occurs in:
• bulbs, for example, daffodil. The leaf bases swell with stored food
from photosynthesis. Buds form internally which develop into
new shoots and new plants in the next growing season.
Runners, for example, a strawberry or spider plant. A lateral stem
grows away from the parent plant and roots develop where the
runner touches the ground. A new plant develops - the runner
eventually withers away leaving the new individual independent.
Rhizomes, for example, marram grass. A rhizome is a specialised
horizontal stem running underground, often swollen with stored
food. Buds develop and form new vertical shoots which become
independent plants.
Stem tubers, for example, potato. The tip of an underground
stem becomes swollen with stored food to form a tuber or storage
organ. Buds on the storage organ develop to produce new shoots
(e.g., the 'eyes' on a potato).
A Figure 1 Blueberries grow on low
bushes - a single clone of plants may
stretch for around half a mile
Using natural clones in horticulture
Natural plant cloning is exploited in horticulture by farmers and
gardeners to produce new plants. Splitting up bulbs, removing young
plants from runners, and cutting up rhizomes all increase plant
numbers cheaply, and the new plants have exactly the same genetic
characteristics as their parents.
It is also possible to take cuttings of many plants - short sections of stems
are taken and planted either directly in the ground (e.g., sugar cane) or
in pots, for example, pelargoniums. Rooting hormone is often applied to
A Figure 2 Each baby spider plant is a
natural clone
576
22.5 Microorganisms, medicines,
and bioremediation
Specification reference: 6.2.1
Since the discovery of penicillin in the 1920s, biotechnology has
played a key role in the development of medicines.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the use of microorganisms in
biotechnological processes to
include penicillin production,
insulin production, and
bioremediation.
:
Producing penicillin
The first effective antibiotic was penicillin, produced by a mould
called Penicillium notatum. The yield of penicillin from this mould
was very small. Commercial production of the drug in the quantities
needed to treat everyone who needed it did not begin until the
discovery of Penicillium chrysogenum by Mary Hunt on a melon from a
market stall.
OOOOHHUSUS
Synoptic link
In Topic 12.7, Preventing and
treating disease, you learnt about
antibiotics and their importance in
the treatment of bacterial diseases.
In Topic 14.4, Diabetes and its
control, you learnt about the
importance of insulin to diabetics.
P. chrysogenum needs relatively high oxygen levels and a rich nutrient
medium to grow well. It is sensitive to pH and temperature. This
affects the way it is produced commercially. A semi-continuous batch
process is used (Topic 22.7, Culturing microorganisms on an industrial
scale). In the first stage of the production process the fungus grows.
In the second stage it produces penicillin. Finally the drug is extracted
from the medium and purified.
• The process uses relatively small fermenters (40–200 dm) because
it is very difficult to maintain high levels of oxygenation in very
large bioreactors.
The mixture is continuously stirred to keep it oxygenated.
There is a rich nutrient medium.
The growth medium contains a buffer to maintain pH at around 6.5.
• The bioreactors are maintained at about 25-27°C.
Making insulin
As you learnt in Topic 21.4, Genetic engineering, biotechnology in
the form of genetic engineering is important in the production of
human medicines - for example, the production of human insulin.
People with type 1 diabetes, and some people with type 2 diabetes,
need regular injections of insulin to control their blood sugar levels. In
the past, insulin was extracted from the pancreas of animals, usually
pigs or cattle, slaughtered for meat. This meant the supply was erratic
because it depended on the demand for meat - when fewer animals
were killed, less insulin was available but the number of people with
diabetes stayed the same. There were a number of other problems.
Some people were allergic to the animal insulin as it was often
impure, although eventually very pure forms were developed which
overcame this problem. The peak activity of animal insulin is several
hours after it is injected, which made calculating when to eat meals
difficult. For some faith groups, using pig products is not permitted.
The development of genetically engineered bacteria which can make
A Figure 1 Penicillin is produced by
the large-scale cultivation of Penicillium
mould followed by processing and
purification of the drug
590
22
Chapter 22 Practice questions
4
c Discuss the advantages and disadvantages
of this type of fermentation. (4 marks)
The cloning of animals is a controversial
subject due to the shortened life expectancies
and health problems of cloned animals.
The graph shows the data collected from an
investigation into the health problems faced
by cloned and conventional cows.
100%
conventional animals
cow clones
Practice questions
1 a Outline the differences between
reproductive and therapeutic cloning.
(3 marks)
b Evaluate the ethical concerns regarding
the reproductive cloning of human
beings.
(4 marks)
c (i) Describe what is meant by the term
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).
(3 marks)
(ii) Suggest why clones produced by
SCNT are not exact genetic clones.
(2 marks)
d Describe the reasons for embryo splitting.
(3 marks)
2 Micropropagation is the name of a process
used to produce artificially cloned plants.
a Explain the meaning of the following
terms and outline their roles in the
micropropagation.
(4 marks)
• Explant
• Callus
b Describe how plant hormones are used
to stimulate the development of cells
obtained from the callus. (5 marks)
3 The diagram shows a type of fermentation.
agitator
frequency of occurence
hydrops
Overall mortality
late-term
pregnancy loss
large offspring
syndrome
neonatal
mortality
Calves with large offspring syndrome
usually have breathing and cardiovascular
problems as well difficult births. Hydrops is
an abnormal build-up of fluid in new-born
calves and is an indication of more serious
health problems.
A survey carried out by the European
Commission investigating European Attitudes
Towards Animal Cloning in October 2008
produced the results shown in the graph.
feed valve
always justifiable, without any constraints
never justifiable
NAONAL
justifiable under certain circumstances
o not applicable/no opinion
acidic
reagent
alkali
reagent
temperature
sensor
pH sensor
percentage
heater band
different countries
X
harvest valve
a
State, giving your reasons, the type of
fermentation being conducted using the
equipment shown in the diagram
(3 marks)
Outline the roles of the valves and sensors
shown in the diagram.
(4 marks)
Discuss, using information from both graphs,
the arguments for and against the cloning of
animals in the production of food. (6 marks)
5 Microorganisms, such as the fungus
Fusarium, can be grown and then purified to
produce mycoprotein, This mycoprotein can
be used as a food source for humans.
The table compares mycoprotein with beef.
b
604
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
needed are extreme and therefore expensive. Furthermore,
unwanted by-products form and the yield is poor. Using
immobilised nitrile hydratase the conversion takes place under
moderate conditions so the process is cheaper and it also gives a
99% yield and no unwanted by-products.
T
Immobilised enzymes in medicine
Immobilised enzymes and microbial cells are increasingly
important both as diagnostic tools in medicine - the
manufacture of drugs - for example, the fungus Rhizopus
arrhizus is immobilised and used in the production of the
steroid drug cortisone.
are detected by the sensor. Because the size of the
response is related to the concentration of the substrate,
these sensors can be very sensitive and accurate in
their measurements and so can be used, for example, by
people with diabetes to determine their blood glucose
levels and therefore judge the insulin dose they need.
Biosensors are used in accurate monitoring of blood
and urine levels of substances such as glucose, urea,
amino acids, ethanol, and lactic acid, as well as in the
monitoring of waste treatment, water analysis, and the
control of complex chemical processes. They are based
on an electrochemical sensor in close proximity to an
immobilised enzyme membrane. The enzymes react
with a specific substrate and the chemicals produced
1 Give one clear advantage of using immobilised
enzymes in biosensors for medical use and one
possible disadvantage, both linked to what you
know of the properties of enzymes.
Suggest how immobilising the enzyme might help
overcome your suggested disadvantage.
Summary questions
(2 marks)
1 a What is meant by an immobilised enzyme?
b What are the main advantages of immobilised enzymes
over whole microorganisms?
c What are the main advantages of immobilised enzymes
over free enzymes?
(4 marks)
(4 marks)
2 Summarise the main ways in which enzymes are immobilised. (4 marks)
3 How can immobilisation:
a increase the effectiveness of an enzyme
b decrease the effectiveness of an enzyme?
(3 marks)
(4 marks)
Investigate one reaction catalysed by immobilised enzymes.
Give the reaction catalysed, the way the enzyme is immobilised,
the importance of the process, and the advantages of using
immobilised enzymes over any other way of catalysing
the reaction.
(6 marks)
603
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
feed animals that we prefer to eat - from fish to cattle. If the world
protein shortage continues, however, people may yet turn to eating
foods made directly from microorganisms. Table 2 shows some of the
advantages and disadvantages of using microorganisms directly to
make food for human consumption.
Table 2
Advantages of using microorganisms
to produce human food
microorganisms reproduce fast and
produce protein faster than animals
and plants
microorganisms have a high protein
content with little fat
Disadvantages of using
microorganisms to produce
human food
some microorganisms can also
produce toxins if the conditions are
not maintained at the optimum
the microorganisms have to be
separated from the nutrient broth and
processed to make the food
need sterile conditions that are
carefully controlled adding to costs
microorganisms can use a wide
variety of waste materials including
human and animal waste, reducing
costs
microorganisms can be genetically
modified to produce the protein
required
production of microorganisms is
not dependant on weather, breeding
cycles etc - it takes place constantly
and can be increased or decreased to
match demand
no welfare issues when growing
microorganisms
often involve GM organisms and many
people have concerns about eating
GM food
the protein has to be purified to
ensure it contains no toxin or
contaminants
many people dislike the thought of
eating microorganisms grown on
waste
has little natural flavour - needs
additives
can be made to taste like anything
Summary questions
1 What are the main advantages of using microorganisms in biotechnological
processes?
(6 marks)
2 Compare the way yeast is used in the process of baking and
brewing
(6 marks)
(2 marks)
3 a Why is milk pasteurised before being used commercially
to make cheese and yoghurt?
b Why is milk homogenised before being used commercially
to make cheese and yoghurt?
c Give two important differences between the production
processes of cheese and yogurt.
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
589
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
Synoptic link
human insulin revolutionised the supply from the 1970s onwards.
The bacteria are grown in a fermenter and downstream processing
results in a constant supply of pure human insulin. You will learn
about the bioreactors used to produce human insulin in Topic 22.7,
Culturing microorganisms on an industrial scale.
You learnt about genetic engineering
and the production of insulin in
Topic 21.4, Genetic engineering.
Bioremediation
In bioremediation, microorganisms are used to break down pollutants
and contaminants in the soil or in water. There are different
approaches to bioremediation:
1 Using natural organisms - many microorganisms naturally break
down organic material producing carbon dioxide and water. Soil
and water pollutants are often biological, for example, sewage
and crude oil. If these naturally occurring microorganisms
are supported, they will break down and neutralise many
contaminants. For example, in an oil spill, nutrients can be added
to the water to encourage microbial growth, and the oil can be
dispersed into smaller particles to give the maximum surface area
for microbial action.
Figure 2 When huge areas of water are
contaminated with oil, as in the Deepwater
Horizon spill in 2010, bioremediation by
microorganisms is the best hope for the
environment
GM organisms -scientists are trying to develop GM bacteria
which can break down or accumulate contaminants which they
would not naturally encounter, for example, bacteria have been
engineered that can remove mercury contamination from water.
Mercury is very toxic and accumulates in food chains. The aim
is to develop filters containing these bacteria to remove mercury
from contaminated sites.
Often, bioremediation takes place on the site of the contamination.
Sometimes material is removed for decontamination. In most cases,
natural microorganisms outperform GM ones - but as our ability
to change the genetic material of microorganisms increases, it may
be possible to use bioremediation even more effectively than it is
used now.
Summary questions
1 What is the main difference
between the use of fungi to
produce penicillin and the use
of bacteria to produce human
insulin?
(2 marks)
Plants and bioremediation
2 What is bioremediation? Why it
is often carried out on the site
of contamination? (6 marks)
There are some pollutants which microorganisms cannot, at the moment,
remove from the soil. In a number of cases, special plants can be used
instead. In the early 1970s, a tree was discovered which produced a blue
sap that turned out to contain 26% nickel in its dry mass. Plants which
can take up large quantities of metals from the ground are known as
hyperaccumulators. The process by which hyperaccumulators take up
metals from the ground is known as bioleaching.
3 With your knowledge of genetic
engineering and biotechnology
so far, produce a flow diagram
to show the stages in the
production of human
insulin.
(6 marks)
Suggest why plants can be used as bioremediators for heavy metal
contamination but microorganisms cannot.
591
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
the base of a cutting to encourage the growth of new roots. Propagation
from cuttings has several advantages over using seeds. It is much faster -
the time from planting to cropping is much reduced. It also guarantees
the quality of the plants. By taking cuttings from good stock, the offspring
will be genetically identical and will therefore crop well. The main
disadvantage is the lack of genetic variation in the offspring should any
new disease or pest appear or if climate change occurs.
Many of the world's most important food crops are propagated by
cloning. Bananas, sugar cane, sweet potatoes, and cassava are all
propagated from stem cuttings or rhizomes. Coffee and tea bushes are
also propagated from stem cuttings.
Synoptic link
Cloning sugar cane
Sugar cane is an internationally important crop used to make sugar
and manufacture biofuels. It is one of the fastest growing crop
plants in the world - the stems can grow 4-5 metres in 11 months if
conditions are good - and it is usually propagated by cloning. Short
lengths of cane about 30 cm long, with three nodes, are cut and
buried in a clear field in shallow trenches, covered with a thin layer
of soil. Per hectare, 10–25 000 lengths of stem are planted.
You learnt about the use of
hormonal rooting powders in
Topic 16.5, The commercial use of
plant hormones.
Practical clon
Many popular houseplants are propagated by taking cuttings. There are a
number of points which increase the success rate of most cuttings:
Study tip
• Use a non-flowering stem
• Make an oblique cut in the stem
Use hormone rooting powder
• Reduce leaves to two or four
Keep cutting well watered
Cover the cutting with a plastic bag for a few days.
Make sure you use terms such as
cloning, propagation, and taking
cuttings correctly.
Summary questions
1 What are perennating organs
and how are they involved in
cloning and survival? (5 marks)
2 Explain the advantages and
disadvantages of propagating
crop plants by cuttings over
using seeds. (4 marks)
A Figure 3 Taking cuttings on a commercial scale
1 How does each of the above points increase the likelihood that a
cutting will succeed?
2 Why are cuttings useful for investigating the effect of growing
conditions on plants?
3 Suggest why it is important to
describe clones as genetically
identical to their parent rather
than simply identical - and
why even this may not
always be true. (5 marks)
577
22.2 Artificial cloning in plants
Specification reference: 6.2.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the production of artificial
clones of plants by
micropropagation and
tissue culture
► the arguments for and against
artificial cloning in plants.
People have propagated plants by cloning for centuries, but there is
a limit to how many 'natural' clones you can make from one plant.
Many plant cells are totipotent - they can differentiate into all of the
different types of cells in the plant. Scientists have developed ways of
using this property to produce huge numbers of identical clones from
one desirable plant.
Micropropagation using tissue culture
Micropropagation is the process of making large numbers of genetically
identical offspring from a single parent plant using tissue culture
techniques. This is used to produce plants when a desirable plant:
does not readily produce seeds
doesn't respond well to natural cloning
is very rare
has been genetically modified or selectively bred with difficulty
is required to be 'pathogen-free' by growers, for example,
strawberries, bananas, and potatoes.
There are a number of ways in which plants can be micropropagated.
One protocol, based on work done at the Royal Botanic Garden
at Kew, uses sodium dichloroisocyanurate, the sterilising tablets
used to make emergency drinking water and babies' bottles safe.
This keeps the plant tissues sterile without being in a sterile lab so
it is extremely useful for scientists in the field working with rare
and endangered plant material - and also for use in schools. Other
protocols are more suited to industrial micropropagation where large
sterilising units are available.
The basic principles of micropropagation and tissue culture are as follows:
•
Take a small sample of tissue from the plant you want to clone -
the meristem tissue from shoot tips and axial buds is often dissected
out in sterile conditions to avoid contamination by fungi and
bacteria. This tissue is usually virus-free.
The sample is sterilised, usually by immersing it in sterilising
agents such as bleach, ethanol, or sodium dichloroisocyanurate.
The latter does not need to be rinsed off which means the tissue is
more likely to remain sterile. The material removed from the plant
is called the explant.
The explant is placed in a sterile culture medium containing a
balance of plant hormones (including auxins and cytokinins)
which stimulate mitosis. The cells proliferate, forming a mass of
identical cells known as a callus.
578
22.6 Culturing microorganisms
in the laboratory
Specification reference: 6.2.1
To investigate microorganisms for the medical diagnosis of disease
or for scientific experiments you need to culture them. This often
involves growing large enough numbers of the microorganisms for us
to see them clearly with the naked eye.
Whenever microorganisms are cultured in the laboratory the correct
health and safety procedures must be followed because even when the
microorganisms are expected to be completely harmless:
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how to culture microorganisms
effectively, using aseptic
techniques
► the standard growth curve of
microorganisms in a closed
culture
practical investigations into
the factors affecting the
growth of microorganisms.
there is always the risk of a mutation taking place making the
strain pathogenic
there may be contamination with pathogenic microorganisms from
the environment.
Culturing microorganisms
The microorganisms to be cultured need food as well as the right
conditions of temperature, oxygen, and pH. The food provided for
microorganisms is known as the nutrient medium. It can be either in
liquid form (broth) or in solid form (agar). Nutrients are often added to
the agar or the broth to provide a better medium for microbial growth.
Some microorganisms need a precise balance of nutrients but often the
medium is simply enriched with good protein sources such as blood, yeast
extract, or meat. Enriched nutrient media allow samples containing a
very small number of organisms to multiply rapidly. The nutrient medium
must be kept sterile (free from contamination by microorganisms) until it
is ready for use. Aseptic techniques are important.
A Figure 1 Culturing microorganisms
like these different types of bacteria
allows us to see what we are working with
Once the agar or nutrient broth is prepared the bacteria must be added
in a process called inoculation.
Inoculating broth
1 Make a suspension of the bacteria to be grown.
2 Mix a known volume with the sterile nutrient broth in the flask.
3 Stopper the flask with cotton wool to prevent contamination from
the air.
4 Incubate at a suitable temperature, shaking regularly to aerate the
broth providing oxygen for the growing bacteria.
A Figure 2 Cultures grown in broth are
usually prepared in flasks or test tubes
whilst agar-based cultures are prepared
in Petri dishes. The hot sterile liquid
agar is poured onto the plates which are
immediately resealed and cooled so that
they set ready for use
Inoculating agar
This also involves a suspension of bacteria but the process is slightly
more complicated.
1
The wire inoculating loop must be sterilised by holding it in a
Bunsen flame until it glows red hot. It must not be allowed to
touch any surfaces as it cools to avoid contamination.
592
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
Higher initial costs of bioreactor - the system needed to use
immobilised enzymes is different from traditional fermenters so
there is an initial investment cost.
More technical issues - reactors which use immobilised enzymes
are more complex than simple fermenters - they have more things
which can go wrong.
How are enzymes immobilised?
Enzymes can be immobilised in a number of ways. They may be bound
to the surface of insoluble supporting materials either by adsorption
onto the surface or by covalent or ionic bonds. They may be entrapped
in a matrix, encapsulated in a microcapsule (like proteases for
detergent use), or behind a semi-permeable membrane. Each of these
methods has advantages and disadvantages as summarised in Table 1.
C= enzyme
covalent or ionic
bonds to inorganic
carrier
adsorption to
inorganic carrier
entrapment in a matrix
encapsulation
Figure 2 Four commonly used ways of immobilising enzymes
Table 1
Method of immobilising the enzymes
Advantages
Disadvantages
simple and cheap to do
enzymes can be lost from matrix
relatively easily
surface immobilisation - adsorption
to inorganic carriers, e.g., cellulose,
silica, carbon nanotubes, and
polyacrylamide gel
can be used with many different processes
enzymes very accessible to substrate
and their activity is virtually unchanged
cost varies
cost varies
surface immobilisation - covalent or
ionic bonding to inorganic carriers
enzymes strongly bound and therefore
unlikely to be lost
covalent bonding, e.g., carriers with
amino, hydroxyl, carboxyl groups
active site of the enzyme may be
modified in process, making it less
effective
enzymes very accessible to substrate
ionic bonding, e.g., polysaccharides
such as cellulose, synthetic polymers
pH and substrate concentration often
have little effect on enzyme activity
widely applicable to different processes
may be expensive
entrapment - in matrix, e.g.,
polysaccharides, gelatin, activated
carbon
can be difficult to entrap
diffusion of the substrate to and
product from the active site can be
slow and hold up the reaction
effect of entrapment on enzyme activity
very variable, depending on matrix
601
22
22.8 Using immobilised enzymes
relatively simple to do
relatively expensive
relatively small effect on enzyme activity
entrapment - membrane entrapment
in microcapsules (encapsulation) or
behind a semi-permeable membrane,
e.g., polymer-based semi-permeable
membranes
widely applicable to different processes
diffusion of the substrate to and
product from the active site can be
slow and hold up the reaction
In some cases whole microorganisms rather than just the enzymes are
immobilised. This has many of the same advantages but avoids the
time-consuming and expensive process of extracting the pure enzyme
and immobilising it before the process starts. On the other hand, the
organisms need food, oxygen, and a carefully controlled environment
to work at their optimum rate.
Using immobilised enzymes
Immobilised enzymes are very useful when large quantities of product are
wanted, because they allow continuous production. Examples include:
Immobilised penicillin acylase used to make semi-synthetic
penicillins from naturally produced penicillins. Many types
of bacteria have developed resistance to naturally occurring
penicillins so they are no longer very effective drugs. Fortunately,
many bacteria are still vulnerable to the semi-synthetic penicillins
produced by penicillin acylase so they are very important in
treating infections caused by bacteria resistant to the original
penicillin. Hundreds of tonnes of these medicines are made every
year by immobilised penicillin acylase.
Immobilised glucose isomerase used to produce fructose from
glucose. Fructose is much sweeter than sucrose or glucose and
is widely used as a sweetener in the food industries. Glucose is
produced from cheap, starch-rich plant material. Glucose isomerise
is then used to turn the cheap glucose into very marketable fructose.
Immobilised lactase used to produce lactose-free milk. Some
people, and cats, are intolerant of lactose (milk sugar). Immobilised
lactase hydrolyses lactose to glucose and galactose, giving lactose-
free milk.
Immobilised aminoacylase used to produce pure samples of
L-amino acids used in the production of pharmaceuticals, organic
chemicals, cosmetics, and food.
Immobilised glucoamylase, which can be used to complete the
breakdown of starch to glucose syrup. Amylase enzymes break
starch down into short chain polymers called dextrins. The final
breakdown of dextrins to glucose is catalysed by immobilised
glucoamylase.
Immobilised nitrile hydratase, an enzyme which is playing an
increasing role in the plastics industry. Acrylamide is a very
important compound which is used in the production of many
plastics. It is made by the hydration of acrylonitrile. Traditionally
the hydration of acrylonitrile to acrylamide was done using
sulphuric acid with a reduced copper catalyst, but the conditions
Study tip
Nitrile hydratase is the enzyme
which catalyses the conversion
of acrylonitrile to acrylamide in a
hydration reaction.
Nitrilases are a group of enzymes
that catalyse the hydrolysis of
nitriles, for example, acrylonitrile
to carboxylic acids and ammonia.
602
22
22.6 Culturing microorganisms in the laboratory
There are several limiting factors which prevent exponential growth in
a culture of bacteria. These include:
Nutrients available - initially there is plenty of food, but as the
numbers of microorganisms multiply exponentially it is used up.
The nutrient level will become insufficient to support further
growth and reproduction unless more nutrients are added.
Oxygen levels - as the population rises, so does the demand for
respiratory oxygen so oxygen levels can become limiting.
Temperature - the enzyme-controlled reactions within
microorganisms are affected by the temperature of the culture
medium. For most bacteria, a low temperature slows down
growth and reproduction, and a higher temperature speeds it up.
If the temperature gets too high it will denature the enzymes,
killing the microorganisms - even thermophiles have a maximum
temperature they can withstand.
Build-up of waste - as bacterial numbers rise, the build-up of toxic
material may inhibit further growth and can even poison and kill
the culture.
Change in pH - as carbon dioxide produced by the respiration of the
bacterial cells increases, the pH of the culture falls until a point where
the low pH affects enzyme activity and inhibits population growth.
Investigating factors which affect the growth of microorganisms -
serial dilutions and bacterial counting A
You can investigate the factors which affect the growth of
bacterial colonies in a number of ways. For example, you can:
set up identical colonies in different conditions of
temperature
set up serial dilutions of nutrients or pH, at a set
temperature.
It is essential when carrying out these experiments
that precautions are taken to ensure aseptic conditions
(free from contamination). For example, using sterile
equipment and a fresh pipette after each dilution.
is overcome by carrying out a serial dilution of the original
culture broth until, when you culture a given volume of
the broth on an agar plate, you can count the number of
colonies. Multiply the number of colonies by the dilution
factor to give you a total viable cell count per volume for
the original colony. As long as you can count the number
of colonies on two or more plates, you can calculate the
mean of the number of organisms in a particular culture.
To see the effect of the conditions you need to be able to
measure the number of microorganisms at the beginning
and end of your investigations. One method is to use
another application of serial dilutions (Figure 5). The
assumption is made that each of the colonies on an
agar plate grows from a single, viable microorganism. If
two bacterial colonies can be seen after culturing, then
there were two living bacteria on the plate, and if 50
patches form there were 50 bacteria on the plate when it
was inoculated. However, in most cases when a plate is
inoculated a solid mass of microbial growth is present after
culturing – you cannot count the individual colonies. This
A student made up serial dilutions of a bacterial
culture from 10-1 to 10-10 A 0.1cm sample was
cultured from each of these dilutions. From the
original dilutions the numbers of bacterial colonies
counted were:
A Original dilution 10-5--500 colonies
B Original dilution 10-6-52 colonies
C Original dilution 10-? – 4 colonies
Calculate (a) the actual dilution of each sample
grown on the plate
(b) the number of bacteria cm in the original
sample as shown on each plate
(c) the mean number of bacteria cm-3 in the
original sample.
594
22
22.8 Using immobilised enzymes
very specific intracellular enzyme outweigh the disadvantages of the
more expensive extraction and isolation process and the need for
more tightly controlled conditions. Examples of intracellular enzymes
used as isolated enzymes in industry include glucose oxidase for
food preservation, asparaginase for cancer treatment, and penicillin
acylase for converting natural penicillin into semi-synthetic drugs
which are more effective.
Immobilised enzymes
Isolated enzymes are more efficient than whole organisms, but
using free enzymes is often very wasteful. Enzymes are not cheap
to produce, but at the end of the process they cannot usually be
recovered and so they are simply lost.
Increasingly enzymes used in industrial processes are immobilised -
attached to an inert support system over which the substrate passes and
is converted to product. This is a case of technology mimicking nature -
enzymes in cells are usually bound to membranes to carry out their
repeated cycles of catalysis. Because immobilised enzymes are held
stationary during the catalytic process, they can be recovered from
the reaction mixture and reused time after time. The enzymes do not
contaminate the end product, so less downstream processing is needed.
These things all make the process more economical.
Advantages of using immobilised enzymes
• Immobilised enzymes can be reused - which is cheaper.
Easily separated from the reactants and products of the reaction they
are catalysing so reduced downstream processing - which is cheaper.
More reliable - there is a high degree of control over the process as
the insoluble support provides a stable microenvironment for the
immobilised enzymes.
Greater temperature tolerance - immobilised enzymes are less
easily denatured by heat and work at optimum levels over a much
wider range of temperatures, making the bioreactor less expensive
to run.
Ease of manipulation - the catalytic properties of immobilised enzymes
can be altered to fit a particular process more easily than those of
free enzymes - for example, immobilised glucose isomerase can be
used continuously for over 1000 hours at temperatures of 60-65°C.
The ability to keep bioreactors running continuously for long periods
without emptying and cleaning helps to keep running costs low.
Disadvantages of using immobilised enzymes
• Reduced efficiency - the process of immobilising an enzyme may
reduce its activity rate.
Higher initial costs of materials - immobilised enzymes are more
expensive than free enzymes or microorganisms. However, the
immobilised enzymes, unlike free enzymes, do not need to be
replaced frequently.
600
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
Food
Content per 100g
mycoprotein
Energy Protein Carbohydrate
(kJ) (g) (g)
357 12 9
1163 26
Total
fat (g)
2.9
18.2
Saturated
fat
0.6
7.0
Iron
(mg)
0.1
2.6
1ml
beef
1ml
1ml 1ml
1ml
1ml
sample of
E. coli
9ml
9ml
9ml
9ml 9ml 9ml
0.1 ml) 0.1 ml) 0.1m
6
443 63 13
colonies colonies colonies)
Use the data in the table to describe and
explain the advantages and disadvantages of
using microorganisms to produce food for
human consumption.
(7 marks)
OCR F212 2010
A number of different methods can be used to
determine the number of bacteria in a sample.
a (i) Outline the differences between using
a graticule and dilution plating to
count bacteria.
(4 marks)
(ii) State the name of another, more
simple technique that uses the same
principle as graticule counts. (1 mark)
b Suggest why it is necessary to maintain
aseptic conditions when working with
bacteria.
(3 mark)
A l ml sample containing bacteria was mixed
with an equal volume of the dye methylene
blue. A drop the resulting mixture was
placed on a graticule and observed under a
microscope.
7
d Calculate the number of bacteria in the
original sample.
(3 marks)
Starch phosphorylase catalyses the
conversion of starch and inorganic phosphate
into glucose-1-phosphate. It has an important
role in the metabolism of starch in plants. It
has been used in the production of glucose-
1-phosphate for use in the treatment of some
heart conditions.
When used for the production of glucose- 1 -
phosphate starch phosphorylase is normally
immobilized.
a Outline the different ways that enzymes
are immobilized.
(4 marks)
The diagram shows the changing activities of
free and immobilized starch phosphorylase at
different temperatures.
0.20
→ 1.25 x 10 ml
immobilised enzyme
0.16
0.14
0.12
soluble enzyme
enzyme activity/arbitrary units
0.10+
The graticule held 1.25 x 10-6 ml of sample.
C Calculate the number of bacteria per ml in
the original sample.
(3 marks)
A serial dilution was carried out on a sample
containing E. coli. Samples from the last three
dilutions were plated and incubated. The
number of colonies that grew on each plate is
shown in the diagram.
0.02
10
20
30 40
temperature/°C
50
60
b
Explain the reasons for the differences
in optimum temperature and maximum
activity of the free and immobilized
enzymes.
(5 marks)
605
22.8 Using immobilised enzymes
Specification reference: 6.2.1
Enzymes, mainly from microorganisms, have been used indirectly for
thousands of years in biotechnologies including brewing, baking, and
making cheese and yoghurt. Many biotechnological processes still use
whole microorganisms as their enzyme source. More recently they are
also being used in isolation.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the uses of immobilised
enzymes in biotechnology
and the different methods of
immobilisation.
Isolated enzymes
Using isolated enzymes instead of whole organisms has some clear
advantages.
Less wasteful - whole microorganisms use up substrate growing
and reproducing, producing biomass rather than product. Isolated
enzymes do not.
More efficient - isolated enzymes work at much higher
concentrations than is possible when they are part of the whole
microorganism.
More specific - no unwanted enzymes present, so no wasteful side
reactions take place.
Maximise efficiency - isolated enzymes can be given ideal
conditions for maximum product formation, which may differ
from those needed for the growth of the whole microorganism.
Less downstream processing - pure product is produced by isolated
enzymes. Whole microorganisms give a variety of products in the
final broth, making isolation of the desired product more difficult
and therefore expensive.
Most of the isolated enzymes used in industrial processes are extracellular
enzymes produced by microorganisms. They are generally easier and
therefore cheaper to use than intracellular enzymes.
active site
A Figure 1 The shape of the active
site gives an enzyme great specificity
and makes it an invaluable tool to the
biotechnologist
Synoptic link
You learnt about extracellular and
intracellular enzymes in Topic 4.1,
Enzyme action.
• Extracellular enzymes are secreted, making them easy to isolate
and use.
Each microorganism produces relatively few extracellular
enzymes, making it easy to identify and isolate the required
enzyme. In comparison, each microorganism produces hundreds
of intracellular enzymes which would need extracting from the
cell and separating.
Extracellular enzymes tend to be much more robust than
intracellular enzymes. Conditions outside a cell are less tightly
controlled than conditions in the cytoplasm, so extracellular
enzymes are adapted to cope with greater variations in
temperature and pH than intracellular enzymes.
However, in spite of the advantages of using extracellular enzymes,
intracellular enzymes are still sometimes used as isolated enzymes
in manufacturing processes. This is because there is a bigger range
of intracellular enzymes (bullet 2) so in some cases they provide the
ideal enzyme for a process. In these cases, the benefits of using a
599
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
22
3
R.
theoretical
growth
Dip the sterilised loop in the bacterial suspension. Remove the lid
of the Petri dish and make a zig-zag streak across the surface of
the agar. Avoid the loop digging into the agar by holding it almost
horizontal. However many streaks are applied, the surface of the
agar must be kept intact.
Replace the lid of the Petri dish. It should be held down
with tape but not sealed completely so oxygen can get in,
preventing the growth of anaerobic bacteria. Incubate at
a suitable temperature.
Figure 3 Inoculating an agar plate
with bacteria
The growth of bacterial colonies
Bacteria can reproduce very rapidly, undergoing asexual
reproduction every 20 minutes in optimum conditions. If a single
bacterium had unlimited space and
A lag exponential stationary
death phase
nutrients, and if all its offspring
phase phase phase
continued to divide at the same rate,
then at the end of 48 hours there
would be 2.2 x 1043 bacteria, weighing
4000 times the weight of the Earth.
Fortunately, in a closed system limited
nutrients and a build-up of waste
products always acts as a brake on
reproduction and growth. Logarithmic
numbers (logs) are mainly used to
represent the bacterial population
because the difference in numbers
from the initial organism to the
billions of descendants is sometimes
too great to represent using standard
numbers.
time
There are four stages to this growth
A Figure 4 The exponential growth theoretically possible for a bacterial
population (red dashed line) is prevented by a variety of limiting factors which,
curve:
fortunately, result in the typical growth curve of a bacterial population in a
closed system
the lag phase when bacteria are adapting to their new
environment. They are growing, synthesising the enzymes they
need, and are not yet reproducing at their maximum rate.
the log or exponential phase is when the rate of bacterial
reproduction is close to or at its theoretical maximum.
the stationary phase occurs when the total growth rate is zero -
the number of new cells formed by binary fission is cancelled out
by the number of cells dying.
the decline or death stage comes when reproduction has almost
ceased and the death rate of cells is increasing.
log of numbers of bacteria
593
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
22
lmlImImlm
1ml
original
Inoculum
Synoptic link
9 cm
9cm
9 cm
9 cm3
0.1 ml
You learnt how to carry out serial
dilutions in Topic 4.2, Factors
affecting enzyme activity.
1:100
1:1000
1:10000
1:100 000
1:1000000
Number of bacteria/ml = number of colonies x dilution of sample
Figure 5 Using serial dilutions and agar plates to calculate the number of bacteria
in a culture
Summary questions
1 Compare the processes of culturing bacteria in broth and on agar. (6 marks)
2 Why are there such clear differences between the theoretical
growth curve of a bacterial colony and the actual growth curve
in a closed culture?
(5 marks)
3 Explain the following statements in terms of factors affecting
bacterial growth:
a Vinegar is a very good preservative.
(2 marks)
b Food eventually goes bad in a fridge.
(2 marks)
c In the Northern hemisphere, material placed in a compost heap
rots down much faster in August than it does in December. (2 marks)
4 Make a flow chart to show how you would calculate the affect
of a factor on bacterial growth using serial dilutions and agar
plating
(6 marks)
595
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
Somatic cell nuclear transfer
Artificial twinning clones an embryo. However, it is now possible to
clone an adult animal, by taking the nucleus from an adult somatic
(body) cell and transferring it to an enucleated egg cell (an oocyte
which has had the nucleus removed). A tiny electric shock is used
to fuse the egg and nucleus, stimulate the combined cell to divide,
and form an embryo that is a clone of the original adult. This process
is known as somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT). The first adult
mammal to be cloned in this way was Dolly the sheep in 1996. Since
then scientists have cloned a wide range of species including mice,
Cows, horses, rabbits, cats, and dogs. SCNT is simple in theory, although
in practice there are many difficulties so the technique is still not
widely used. As you can see in Figure 3, animals of different breeds are
often used as the cell donor, the egg donor, and the surrogate mother
to make it easier to identify the original animal at each stage.
1
2
3
The nucleus is removed from a somatic cell of an adult animal.
The nucleus is removed from a mature ovum harvested from a
different female animal of the same species (it is enucleated).
The nucleus from the adult somatic cell is placed into the
enucleated ovum and given a mild electric shock so it fuses and
begins to divide. In some cases, the nucleus from the adult cell is
not removed - it is simply placed next to the enucleated ovum and
the two cells fuse (electrofusion) and begin to divide under the
influence of the electric current.
The embryo that develops is transferred into the uterus of a third
animal, where it develops to term.
The new animal is a clone of the animal from which the original
somatic cell is derived, although the mitochondrial DNA will come
from the egg cell.
5
6
TL
egg without a
nucleus fused
with donor cell
using a pulse of
electricity
cell taken from udder of
donor adult and cultured
in laboratory for six days
embryo resulting from
fusion of udder cell and
egg transfered to the
Surrogate mother
uterus of a third sheep gives birth to lamb.
which acts as the
Dolly is genetically
Surrogate mother
identical with the
sheep that donated
the udder cell
(the donor)
unfertilised egg taken from another
sheep. Nucleus removed from the egg
A Figure 3 Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)
This process is also known as reproductive cloning, because live
animals are the end result. The cloned embryo can then be split to
produce several identical clones.
Synoptic link
You learnt about electrofusion in
Topic 21.4, Genetic engineering.
There have been some problems with the animals produced by SCNT –
Dolly the sheep had to be put down when she was only six years old
583
22
22.3 Cloning in animals
because she suffered from arthritis and lung disease, usually seen in
much older sheep. However, scientists have improved the technique and
whilst concerns about premature ageing in clones produced by SCNT
persist, researchers in Japan have produced 581 clones from one original
donor mouse, through 25 generations. The mice in each generation were
cloned to produce the next generation. Furthermore, they all had babies
naturally to prove they functioned normally. All of the mice had normal
lifespans. The same team has also produced SCNT clones from the bodies
of mice which had been frozen for 16 years.
SCNT can be used in a number of ways. It is used in pharming - the
production of animals which have been genetically engineered to
produce therapeutic human proteins in their milk. It can also be used
to produce genetically modified (GM) animals which grow organs that
have the potential to be used in human transplants.
Pros and cons of animal cloning
Animal cloning is still not widespread, although it is increasingly used in
agriculture and the world of animal breeding and medicine. A number
of arguments are put forward both for and against the process.
Arguments for animal cloning
Artificial twinning enables high-yielding farm animals to produce
many more offspring than normal reproduction.
Artificial twinning enables the success of a sire (the male animal) at
passing on desirable genes to be determined. If the first cloned embryo
results in a successful breeding animal, more identical animals can
be reared from the remaining frozen clones. The use of meat from
animals born to a cloned parent is now permitted in the US.
SCNT enables GM embryos to be replicated and to develop, giving many
embryos from one engineering procedure. It is an important process in
pharming - the production of therapeutic human proteins in the milk of
genetically engineered farm animals, such as sheep and goats.
SCNT enables scientists to clone specific animals, for example,
replacing specific pets or cloning top-class race horses. Pet cats and
dogs have been cloned in the US at great expense.
SCNT has the potential to enable rare, endangered, or even extinct
animals to be reproduced. In theory, the nucleus from dried or frozen
tissue could be transferred to the egg of a similar living species and
used to produce clones of species that have been dead for a long time.
Arguments against animal cloning
SCNT is a very inefficient process - in most animals it takes many eggs
to produce a single cloned offspring.
Many cloned animal embryos fail to develop and miscarry or produce
malformed offspring.
Many animals produced by cloning have shortened lifespans, although
cloned mice have now been developed which live a normal two years.
584
22.7 Culturing microorganisms on
an industrial scale
Specification reference: 6.2.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the importance of manipulating
the growing conditions in batch
and continuous fermentation
in order to maximise the yield
of product required.
In any bioprocess the microorganism involved must be able to
synthesise or break down the chemical required, work reasonably fast,
give a good yield of the product, use relatively cheap nutrients, and
not require extreme (and therefore expensive) conditions. It must not
produce any poisons that contaminate the product or mutate easily
into non-functioning forms.
Primary and secondary metabolites
What is wanted from the microorganisms varies from one bioprocess
to another.
Sometimes, you would want as much microorganism as possible,
because the microorganism itself is the product to be sold, for example,
single-celled protein such as Quorn, or baker's yeast.
glucose
used up
penicillin
(secondary
metabolite)
Sometimes, substances are wanted which
are formed as an essential part of the normal
functioning of a microorganism, for example,
ethanol (a product of anaerobic respiration in
yeast), ethanoic acid, and a range of amino
acids and enzymes. They are known as primary
metabolites.
concentration
biomass
time
In some circumstances, organisms produce
substances which are not essential for normal
growth, but are still used by the cells. Examples
include many pigments, and the toxic
chemicals plants produce to protect themselves
against attack by herbivores. The organism
would not suffer, at least in the short term,
without them. These chemicals are known as
secondary metabolites, and they are often the
required product in a bioprocess, for example,
penicillin and many other antibiotics.
A Figure 1 Primary metabolites are usually formed in the period of
active growth, whilst secondary metabolites tend to be formed during
the stationary phase of the life of the culture once the cell mass has
reached its maximum. The time at which the culture is harvested will
depend on what we actually want from the microorganisms
Types of bioprocess
Once a microorganism has been chosen, and the ideal size and
shape of the bioreactor (reaction vessel) decided, the organisation
of the commercial production has to be decided. Two of the main
ways of growing microorganisms are batch fermentation and
continuous fermentation.
Batch fermentation
The microorganisms are inoculated into a fixed volume of medium.
As growth takes place, nutrients are used up and both new
biomass and waste products build up.
596
22
22.7 Culturing microorganisms on an industrial scale
Mixing things up
Inside a bioreactor there are large volumes of liquid, which may be
quite thick and viscous due to the growth of microorganisms. Simple
diffusion is not enough to ensure that all the microorganisms receive
enough food and oxygen or that the whole mixture is kept at the right
temperature, so most bioreactors have a mixing mechanism and many
are stirred continuously.
Asepsis
If a bioprocess is contaminated by microorganisms from the air, or from
workers, it can seriously affect the yield. To solve this problem most
bioreactors are sealed, aseptic units. If the process involves genetically
engineered organisms, it is a legal requirement that they should be
contained within the bioreactor and not be released into the environment.
antifoam
acid/base
motor
steam
nutrient or inoculant-=
pressure guage
sterile nutrient medium
filtered waste gases
cold-water outlet
impeller -
oxygen concentration probe
-pH probe
temperature probe
cooling jacket
cold-water inlet -
0.0.0
sparger
=
compressed air
steam
harvest pipe
A Figure 3 The design of bioreactors is moving forward all the time as new and
more sensitive ways of controlling conditions during fermentation processes become
available, making it easier to get the maximum yield from any process
Summary questions
1 Bioreactors may run batch or continuous processes. What is the
difference?
(6 marks)
2 Choose three factors which need to be controlled in a bioreactor to
give the maximum yield of product and for each explain why it is
important and how it might be controlled.
(6 marks)
3 Look at Figure 1.
a What is the desired end product of this reaction?
(1 mark)
b What tells you that this bioreactor is not producing food? (3 marks)
c Sketch a graph to show what you would expect to see if this process
was producing a food material rather than a drug.
(3 marks)
598
22
CLONING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
As the culture reaches the stationary phase, overall growth
ceases but during this phase the microorganisms often carry out
biochemical changes to form the desired end products (such as
antibiotics and enzymes).
The process is stopped before the death phase and the products
harvested. The whole system is then cleaned and sterilised and a
new batch culture started up.
Continuous culture
• Microorganisms are inoculated into sterile nutrient medium and
start to grow.
Sterile nutrient medium is added continually to the culture once it
reaches the exponential point of growth.
Culture broth is continually removed - the medium, waste
products, microorganisms, and product - keeping the culture
volume in the bioreactor constant.
Continuous culture enables continuous balanced growth, with levels
of nutrients, pH, and metabolic products kept more or less constant.
Both methods of operating a bioreactor can be adjusted to ensure
either the maximum production of biomass or the maximum
production of the primary or secondary metabolites. Most systems are
adapted for maximum yield of metabolites. The majority of industrial
processes use batch or semi-continuous cultivation. Continuous
cultivation is largely used for the production of single-celled protein
and in some waste water treatment processes.
All bioreactors produce a mixture of unused nutrient broth,
microorganisms, primary metabolites, possibly secondary metabolites,
and waste products. The useful part of the mixture has to be separated
out by downstream processing. This is one of the most difficult and
expensive parts of the whole bioprocess – the percentage of the total
cost of a product which is due to downstream processing costs varies
from 15-40%.
Controlling bioreactors
Whether a bioreactor is simply a container containing microbial broth
or a complex aseptic fermenter, it is very important to control and
manipulate the growing conditions to maximise the yield of product
required. Factors which need to be controlled include:
A Figure 2 Bioreactors range from
around a 10 litre capacity to hundreds
of litres and are widely used in the
pharmaceutical industry
Temperature
Iſ the temperature is too low the microorganisms will not grow quickly
enough. If the temperature gets too high, enzymes start to denature
and the microorganisms are inhibited or destroyed. Bioreactors often
have a heating and/or a cooling system linked to temperature sensors
and a negative feedback system to maintain optimum conditions.
Nutrients and oxygen
Oxygen and nutrient medium can be added in controlled amounts to
the broth when probes or sample tests indicate that levels are dropping.
597
