24
24.9 Environmentally sensitive ecosystems
Snowdonia National Park, Wales
Snowdonia National Park covers 2000 square kilometres of
countryside in north-west Wales. It contains the highest mountain
range in England and Wales, with four peaks over 1000 metres
(including Mount Snowdon at 1085 in). The rugged terrain includes
lakes and fast-flowing rivers, and wide tracts of ancient woodland
and heath.
A Figure 5 Snowdonia National Park
Animals present
The rich diversity of habitats in the region provides homes for a wide
range of birds. These include:
Coast and estuary birds such as choughs, cormorants, and
Oystercatchers.
Forest birds such as pied flycatcher, redstart, and wood warblers.
Moorland and mountain birds such as ospreys, buzzards, and
sparrowhawks.
There are also over 40 species of land mammal present in Snowdonia
including badgers, voles, deer, and hedgehogs.
Plants present
Snowdonia supports an equally diverse range of plant species. For
example, if you climb to the top of Mount Snowdon you may come
across the Snowdon lily (Gagea serotina) and other hardy arctic-alpine
plants that have evolved to cope with extreme conditions. Lower
down the slopes, the mountain is fringed by woodlands of oak, alder,
and wych elm.
Control of human activities
Snowdonia National Park was created in 1951 to conserve the
biodiversity of the region. The Park is home to over 25 000 people,
many of whom work on the land. It also attracts several million
visitors each year. Climbing, walking, cycling, and watersports are
some of the most popular activities.
The key purposes of the Park authority are to:
A Figure 6 Walkers are asked to keep
to designated footpaths in many areas
of the park to prevent plants being
trampled. The areas in which mountain
bikes can be used is even more limited
as large tyres with deep treads damage
vegetation and top soil, which begins a
process of path erosion
• Conserve and enhance the natural beauty, wildlife, and cultural
heritage of the area.
Promote opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of
the special qualities of the Park.
Enhance the economic and social well-being of communities
within the Park.
The Dinorwig power station is a pumped-storage hydroelectric power
station which was built to help meet the demands of the National Grid
during sudden bursts of energy requirement. To preserve the natural
beauty of Snowdonia National Park, the power station itself is located
deep inside the mountain Elidir Fawr, inside tunnels and caverns.
This has minimised the impact to the environment whilst meeting the
human demand for energy.
652
24
POPULATIONS AND SUSTAINABILITY
Animals present
All endothermic animals living on and around Antarctica rely on thick
layers of blubber to insulate them from the cold. These include whales,
seals, and penguins. For example, the blubber layer on a Weddell seal
(Leptonychotes weddellii) can be 10 cm thick.
The emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) is the only warm-blooded
animal that remains on the Antarctic continent during the winter.
Females lay one egg in June (mid-winter) and leave to spend the
winter at sea. The male penguins stay on land, surviving the most
extreme winter conditions for up to nine weeks (with no food),
keeping their egg warm by balancing it on their feet and covering it
with a flap of abdominal skin.
A few invertebrates live on the continent all year. The largest is a
wingless midge called Beligica antarctica, although at a body size of
around 5 mm it can only be viewed properly under a microscope.
Plants present
Plants can only grow in the ice-free regions (around 2% of the
continent). Lichens and moss grow in any favourable niche such as
in sand, soil, rock, and on the weathered bones and feathers of dead
animals. Algae are also able to grow in many sheltered areas.
A Figure 3 There are many different
species of penguins in Antarctica,
including the large, colourful emperor
penguin shown here with its chick
Control of human activities
With the exception of a few specialised scientific settlements, Antarctica
is too cold for people to live. However, in the last 100 years increasing
numbers of tourists have been visiting Antarctica. Most visit the
Antarctic Peninsula, accessible from Chile, where the climate is mild in
comparison with the rest of the continent, and there is much wildlife.
Although strictly controlled in Antarctica (only allowing visits for
a few hours to selected area), human activity has had a number of
effects on the continent:
Planet-wide impacts such as global warming (causing some parts
of the coastal ice sheet to break up) and ozone depletion, caused
by human activities elsewhere.
Hunting of whales and seals, and fishing of some Antarctic species,
has depleted stocks of these organisms.
Soil contamination, particularly around scientific research stations.
Discharging of waste into the sea, including human sewage.
The Antarctic treaty was established in 1961 to protect the unique
nature of the Antarctic continent. This treaty remains in force
indefinitely. Some of its provisions include:
scientific cooperation between nations
protection of the Antarctic environment
conservation of plants and animals
designation and management of protected areas
management of tourism.
A Figure 4 These are humpback
whales (Megaptera novaeangliae)
exhaling in calm waters of the Antarctic
Peninsula. The International Whaling
Commission (IWC) was established in
1949 to protect whales such as the blue
and humpback whales whose numbers
were diminished by whaling. Indicators
show that whale populations are
beginning to recover, but such long-lived
species with low reproductive rates are
incapable of rebuilding their numbers in
just a few years
651
24.9 Environmentally sensitive
ecosystems
Specification reference: 6.3.2
Although all ecosystems are, to some extent, fragile, some regions
are less resistant to changes than others. These regions are often
referred to as environmentally sensitive ecosystems. For example, although
mass tourism can bring economic vitality to an area, it can also bring
attendant changes to an environment that are not always positive,
such as the overdevelopment of a coastline. This level of human
activity can lead to losses in the biodiversity of the region.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the effects of human
activities on the animal
and plant populations in
environmentally sensitive
ecosystems and how
these human activities are
controlled.
In many environmentally sensitive areas the same types of
management techniques are used. These include:
limiting the areas tourists can visit
controlling the movement of livestock
introducing anti-poaching measures
replanting of forests and native plants
limiting hunting through quotas and seasonal bans.
This topic looks at examples of some of the world's environmentally
sensitive ecosystems, which without control of human activities will
be lost.
The Galapagos Islands, Pacific Ocean
The Galapagos is an archipelago of volcanic islands that rise up from
the bed of the Pacific Ocean 1000 km west of Ecuador. They are
of special interest because they have never been connected to the
mainland. The original flora and fauna that reached the islands' shores
had to survive a crossing of hundreds of kilometres of ocean. Darwin
used evidence he gained from his visits to these islands to develop his
theory of evolution by natural selection.
Animals present
The majority of land animals living on the islands are reptiles - there
is only one species of land mammal, the Galapagos rice rat. These
species arrived here by being washed away from mainland river banks,
floating on rafts of vegetation.
Over millions of years these animals, and many of the marine birds
that also arrived on the islands, have adapted to their environment
in isolation, resulting in many species that are unique to the islands.
These include:
The Galapagos giant tortoise (Chelonoidis nigra), which grows to
over 150 cm in length.
The flightless cormorant (Phalacrocorax harrisi), whose reduced
wings were better for fishing underwater, when flight was not
needed to escape mainland predators.
A Figure 1 The Galapagos giant
tortoise (Chelonoidis nigra)
649
24.4 Conservation and preservation
Specification reference: 6.3.2
You will often hear reports in the media that steps need to be taken
to conserve the environment for future generations. This is true not
only to preserve the beauty of the natural world, but to try to ensure
that the biodiversity of world ecosystems is not lost. There are many
reasons for maintaining biodiversity, including economics, preserving
genetic variety, and retaining species that might be useful to people.
People tend to use the terms conservation and preservation
interchangeably, but in biology they have quite distinct meanings.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
the reasons for, and
differences between,
conservation and
preservation.
..
Conservation
Conservation means the maintenance of biodiversity through human
action or management. This includes maintaining diversity between
species, maintaining genetic diversity within a species, and the
maintenance of habitats.
Conservation involves the management of ecosystems so that the
natural resources in them can be used without running out. This
is known as sustainable development. For example, the Forest
Stewardship Council ensures that forests are managed so that they
provide a sustainable source of timber. Their mission is to promote
socially beneficial, environmentally appropriate, and economically
viable management of forests across the world. You will find out more
about sustainable production in Topic 24.5, Sustainability.
A Figure 1 Controlled grazing of
fens is a valuable fen management
conservation tool. It helps to maintain
open, species-rich fen communities by
reducing plant biomass and controlling
scrub invasion
Synoptic link
Conservation approaches also include reclamation - this is the process of
restoring ecosystems that have been damaged or destroyed. For example,
a habitat may be destroyed by floods, or as a result of a new building
project. Reclamation also involves techniques such as controlled burning
of areas of a forest, which can halt succession and increase biodiversity.
Conservation is dynamic and needs to adapt to constant change.
Look back at Topic 11.8, Methods
of maintaining biodiversity to
remind yourself of the range of
in situ and ex situ techniques
that scientists use to conserve
biodiversity and the importance of
conservation.
Preservation
Preservation is the protection of an area by restricting or banning
human interference, so that the ecosystem is kept in its original
state. It is most commonly used when preserving ecologically,
archaeologically, or palaeontologically sensitive resources, which
can easily be damaged or destroyed by disturbances. When lands are
preserved, visitation (along with most other activities) is not allowed,
except by those who manage and monitor such areas.
Newly discovered caves, called virgin caves, are pristine. These may
contain very sensitive geological formations or unique ecosystems -
walking from one cave to another can cause irreparable damage,
for example, through direct crushing or by the movement of dirt
around the cave system. Such damage can be avoided by barring
entrance to caves altogether thus preserving these unique habitats.
Only through preservation can the integrity of these ecosystems be
Figure 2 Endangered Gray bats (Myotis
grisescens) in a cave in Tennessee
637
24
24.4 Conservation and preservation
guaranteed. However, this can result in no one
being able to enjoy the caves and some argue that
there is no point in having a resource that cannot
be used.
Conservation of gray bats oo
The gray bat is an example of a species which has
been successfully supported through a series of
conservation measures. Inhabiting a small number
of caves across the south-eastern US, the gray bat
became endangered following the human exploitation
of its habitat, and through pesticide bioaccumulation.
Following the collection of data about bat numbers and
particular habitat requirements, a series of measures
were introduced to support the remaining population,
which is currently estimated to be around one million:
In reality it is objects and buildings that are
more commonly preserved, whereas the natural
environment is conserved. Examples of preserved
habitats include areas set aside in nature reserves
and marine conservation zones where human
interference is prohibited.
Importance of conservation
Conservation is important for many reasons (look
back at Topic 11.7), which can be broadly divided into
three categories: economic, social, and ethical reasons.
• In 1982, the gray bat was placed on the
International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) endangered species list.
Caves supporting gray bat populations were gated,
preventing human access but allowing bats to freely
enter and leave the caves.
The exploitation of land around the caves, which
provide the bats with their food sources, was
strictly controlled. This included limiting the use of
pesticides in these regions.
A programme of education was launched for those
who inhabited the areas surrounding regions which
supported a bat population.
• Economic - to provide resources that humans
need to survive and to provide an income. For
example, rainforest species provide medicinal
drugs, clothes, and food that can be traded.
Other forests are used for the production of
timber and paper.
Social - many people enjoy the natural beauty
of wild ecosystems as well as using them for
activities which are beneficial to health by
providing a means of relaxation and exercise.
Examples of these activities include bird
watching, walking, cycling, and climbing.
Ethical-all organisms have a right to exist,
and most play an important role within their
ecosystem. Many people believe that we should
not have the right to decide which organisms
can survive, and which we could live without.
We also have a moral responsibility for future
generations to conserve the wide variety of
existing natural ecosystems.
1
State one conservation measure and one
preservation measure taken to support the
population of gray bats.
Suggest and explain the advantages and
disadvantages of placing the gray bat on the
IUCN endangered species list.
Summary questions
1 State the difference between conservation and preservation.
(1 mark)
2 There are many reasons why natural habitats may be conserved. State
one example of why a habitat may be conserved for:
a economic reasons
(1 mark)
b social reasons
(1 mark)
c ethical reasons.
(1 mark)
3 Suggest and explain one conservation and one preservation technique
that could be used to maintain biodiversity in an area. (4 marks)
638
24
24.9 Environmentally sensitive ecosystems
The marine iguana (Amblyrhynchus cristatus), which contains the
advantageous mutation, over a land iguana, of the ability to swim
effectively. Unless they are trying to attract a mate, the iguana
appears black or dark grey, this allows these ectotherms to bask in
the sun and raise raise their body temperatures to approximately
36°C before swimming in the cold sea where they forage for food.
The higher the temperature the longer they can forage.
Plants present
On the larger islands three distinct regions exist, each of which
supports particular plant species. These regions are:
• the coastal zone, which contains salt-tolerant species such as
mangrove and saltbush
the arid zone, which contains drought-tolerant species such as
cacti and the carob tree
the humid zone, which contains dense cloud-forest. These trees
support populations of mosses and liverworts.
Figure 2 The Scalesia tree, which
dominates the humid zone of the
Galapagos Islands. This tree originates
from the same family as the diminutive
daisy, but grows to heights of over
10 metres
Control of human activities
Until the 19th century the islands were hardly visited by humans.
However, as a result of the whaling trade this all changed. The whalers
disrupted the islands' fragile ecosystems by allowing domestic animals
to roam loose, chopping forests for fires to render down whale fat,
and removing tens of thousands of live giant tortoises, whose meat
would sustain the whalers on their long sea voyage due to their ability
to survive for long periods without food or water. The goats they
introduced have also outcompeted giant tortoises on many islands.
The Galapagos National Park was established in 1959. Since then,
measures have been taken to protect the living and non-living parts of
this unique ecosystem, including:
introduction of park rangers across the islands
limiting human access to particular islands, or specific parts of islands
controlling migration to and from the islands
strict controls over movement of introduced animals such as pigs
(the presence of these were noted by Darwin).
It is hoped that through these and many other measures, the islands'
flora and fauna can be protected for future generations.
Antarctica
Antarctica is the coldest, highest, driest, windiest, and emptiest continent.
It is almost entirely covered by an ice sheet, which averages 2 km thick.
This ice sheet contains around 70% of the world's fresh water.
The average temperature in Antarctica in the winter is below -30°C.
Unlike most parts of the Earth Antarctica has just two seasons,
summer and winter - during the summer, many parts of the continent
experience 24-hour sunlight - in the winter many parts of the
continent experience 24-hour darkness.
650
24
24.8 Ecosystem management - peat bogs
Historically, the greatest decline has occurred through afforestation
(the establishment of a forest or stand of trees in an area where
there was no forest), peat extraction, and agricultural intensification,
including land drainage. These activities have all contributed to the
drying out of the bogs.
Conserving lowland bogs
The key to conserving lowland bogs is to maintain or restore
appropriate water levels. Steps which are taken to conserve areas of
lowland bog include:
Figure 2 This peat is drying to be
used as fuel. As peat dries out it releases
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere
Figure 3 Traditional peat cutting in
a bog in south-west Ireland. Slabs of
peat are cut from a shallow trench and
stacked in small heaps to dry. Hand-
cutting peat is a slow, labour-intensive
process that can allow the bog to
partially recover. It is very different from
industrialised, mechanical extraction.
The peat companies deep-drain
peatlands and strip all vegetation from
vast expanses of bog surface, wiping out
whole bogs. The Wildlife Trusts are active
in attempting to stop this destruction
and working to conserve and protect the
few remaining areas
Ensuring that the peat and vegetation of the bog surface is as
undisturbed and as wet as possible. Most bogs are surrounded by
ditches to allow water to run off, preventing flooding of nearby
land. In restoring a bog, ditch blocking may be required for a
period of time to raise the water table to the bog surface.
Removal of seedling trees from the area. Trees have a high water
requirement due to transpiration. Therefore, any tree seedling that
has the potential to remove water from an area of peatland, or to
reduce its ability to support bog vegetation, should be removed to
maintain water levels in the area.
Using controlled grazing to maintain the biodiversity of peatland.
Grazing ensures a diverse wetland surface in terms of structure
and species composition. This in turn provides a wide range of
habitats for many rare insect species.
Continuing intensive land use threatens the existence of much of the
remaining peatlands in the UK. Although around 10% of the UK is
classified as peat bog of one form or another, around 80% of these
areas are in a poor condition. A number of organisations are working
to preserve these important ecosystems, including The Wildlife Trusts,
Natural England, and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds
(RSPB). It is hoped that, through the conservation work of these
and other organisations, an appropriate balance can be met between
our need to exploit the land, and the maintenance of a sustainable,
biodiverse ecosystem.
Summary questions
1 State what is meant by a peat bog.
(1 mark)
2 Describe two conservation measures which can be taken to
conserve a peat bog ecosystem.
(2 marks)
3 State and explain why the UK has lost such a large proportion
of its peatlands over the past century.
(4 marks)
648
24
Chapter 24 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 The diagram shows two ways in which
trees are pruned in order for wood to be
continually harvested from the same trees
for many years. The health of the trees is not
affected in any negative way.
(iii) Enhanced global warming has led to
melting of the polar ice caps.
Suggest how this has been partly responsible
for the increase in tourism. (1 mark)
A student carried out an investigation into
the perception that people have about the
impact of tourism on endangered species
such as the blue whale.
The results are shown in the graphs.
percentage of respondents
a
g
b c d e f
potential benefits
2
a none
e people donate to conservation
b people learn about whales f tourism boats carry scientists
C increased appreciation for whales g people get involved in research
d people advocate for conservation
a Name the two types of tree pruning
shown in the diagram.
(2 marks)
b Explain why these forms of timber
management are sustainable. (2 marks)
c Suggest how these forms of tree pruning
help maintain biodiversity. (3 marks)
Tourism, particularly ecotourism, is a growing
industry. The Antarctic Peninsula is even
becoming a popular tourist destination. There
are many reasons for the increase in tourist
numbers such as television making people
more aware of extreme environments and
more flexible working hours.
a Suggest three more reasons for the
increase in tourism to places like
Antarctica.
(3 marks)
The table shows the changes in the
number of tourists travelling to Antarctica
over the last 20 years.
100
percentage of respondents
abcdefg
potential threat
-
<1987
Year
tour operator
scientists
tourists
1990/1992/ 2002/
1991 1993 2003
2006
2007
a
b
C
d
none
travelers
pollution (other)
vessel noise
e
f
g
Number
of
visitors
oil spills
stress
collisions
<1000 4698 6500 24 281 >30000 >40000
b
(i) Describe how the numbers of tourists
visiting Antarctica have changed over
the last 20 years.
(3 marks)
(ii) Outline the advantages and
disadvantages of this change in
tourism to Antarctica. (5 marks)
654
Module 6 Practice questions
Gardeners at Kew use biological control
agents to help prevent pest attack.
The table provides some information
regarding the biological control agents of
whitefly used at Kew.
Name of Type of
control agent organism
Verticillium fungus
lecanii
Encarsia parasitic
formosa wasp
Mode of Conditions
action required
infects and kills high
adults and larvae humidity
eggs laid on low pest
larvae and adult density
emergence kills
pest
feeds on larvae high pest
density
7 a Explain why succession is a dynamic
process.
(2 marks)
b Describe the changes in the following
elements of an ecosystem during
succession:
(6 marks)
Species composition, Species diversity,
Density and biomass of organisms,
Heterotroph population
In an estuary, a salt marsh often develops
on muddy shores between the lowest
and the highest tide levels. A salt marsh
is characterized by the vegetation that
grows in these conditions. Succession can
be seen from low tide level through the
network of creeks and gulleys up to high
tide level and beyond onto higher ground.
Students carried out research on two
separate salt marshes, A and B. They
measured the elevation range above
the mean sea level where five key plant
species were found. Their results are
shown in the graph.
Macrolophus predatory
calliginosus walking bug
a
b
Explain, using information from the table,
why gardeners at Kew release only one
control agent into one greenhouse at any
particular time.
(4 marks)
Suggest why E. formosa would not be
effective at high pest densities. (2 marks)
Explain why the gardeners at Kew prefer
not to use pesticides.
(4 marks)
Some researchers investigated the effects
of natural predators on another insect
pest, Russian wheat aphid (Diuraphis
noxia). The results from this study are
shown in the graph.
salt marsh A
salt marsh B
key
soil elevation above mean sea level/cm
+ mean
I standard
deviation
key
i natural predators
present
| natural predators
absent
salicornia sp.
spartina sp."
sy
plant species
mean number of aphids per plant
juncus sp.
spartina sp.
salicomnia sp.
limonium sp.
sarcocornia sp.
juncus sp.
limonium sp.
sarcocornia sp.
1234567
week
d Describe the results of this study. (3 marks)
Despite the environmental advantages
of using biological control agents, most
farmers still use pesticides to control pests.
Suggest why this is the case. (3 marks)
OCR 2805/03 2010
(i) Suggest two environmental features
that make a salt marsh an extreme
habitat for plants to live in. (2 marks)
State one similarity and one
difference in the overall distribution
of the five species on the two salt
marshes.
(2 marks)
(iii) Suggest which one of the plant
species shown in the graph is a
pioneer species.
(1 mark)
(iv) Suggest how pioneer plants can alter
the salt marsh environment. (2 marks)
660
Module 6 Practice questions
c (i) Compare the structure of the trp
operon to a lac operon. (5 marks)
The diagram summarises the action of
the repressor protein in the trp operon.
DNAXD
no RNA made
where:
X = sum of (total)
N = the total number of organisms of all
species and
n = the total number of organisms of a
particular species.
mRNA
Two communities at different sites within
the sand dunes were analysed.
The results are shown in table.
protein
active repressor
N[n-1)
50
2450
90
3
90
12
Plant species Number of
individuals (n)
Plant species on the Foredune
marram grass
milkweed
10
poison ivy
sand cress
rose
sand cherry
3
Total
N = 78
Plant species on the mature dune
oak tree
hickory tree
1
maple tree
beech tree
tryptophan (corepressor)
(ii) Suggest how the trp operon is
switched on and off. (4 marks)
Consider the following statements:
Gene expression in prokaryotes is controlled mainly
during the process of transcription.
Gene expression in eukaryotes is controlled at the
transcriptional, post-transcriptional, translational,
and post-translational levels.
Explain, using your knowledge of the
structures of eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cells, the differences in the control of gene
expression.
(7 marks)
a Describe the meaning of the following
terms: Species evenness, Species richness.
(2 marks)
The table shows the number of three
species found in samples from ponds in
the Indiana Dunes.
2648
0
0
4
fern
moss
columbine
trillium
virginia creeper
solomon seal
Total
Awwwa
12
3
6
62
Lava species
N = 27
Number of
individuals
in sample 1
200
Number of
individuals
in sample 2
20
55
925
Caddisfly larva
Dragonfly lava
Mosquito larva
425
375
5
Total
1000
1000
b
Describe the differences in species
evenness and richness between the
two sites.
(3 marks)
The richness and evenness of a
community is used to calculate the
Simpson diversity index,
c (i) Calculate the Simpson diversity index
for two local communities.
(ii) Suggest reasons for the different
diversity indexes.
(3 marks)
It has been estimated that, at the current
rate of destruction, tropical rainforests may
disappear in less than 150 years.
Outline the ecological, economical, ethical,
and aesthetic reasons for the conservation of
rainforests.
(7 marks)
There are over 40 000 plants at The Royal
Botanic Gardens at Kew. These plants are
susceptible to attack by insect pests, such as
whitefly, and Trialeurodes spp.
6
D= 1 - (264)
659
24
POPULATIONS AND SUSTAINABILITY
The Lake District, England
The Lake District is England's largest national park, at over 2292 km².
The national park contains Scafell Pike, England's highest mountain,
and Wastwater, its deepest lake. Terrain within the park includes
regions of moorland and fell, and includes 16 lakes dammed by glacial
moraines (soil and rock debris) around the end of the last ice age.
The dales and fringes of the lakes provide a rich variety of habitats,
including areas of ancient woodland.
A Figure 7 Wastwater, the deepest
of all the lakes in the Lake District,
surrounded by mountains
Animals present
The varied landscapes of the Lake District provide homes for a wide
range of wildlife. These include water voles, natterjack toads, and a
number of species of bat, through to red deer and birds of prey such as
the golden eagle and osprey. A number of native species are under threat
including the red squirrel and the vendace, a species of fish that is only
found in this region, and which appears on the IUCN endangered list.
Plants present
In the central fells, there are habitats that exist above the tree line.
These are rare in the UK and they support a diverse range arctic-alpine
plant communities. These include such species as purple saxifrage
and alpine cinquefoil. Specialised trees have evolved in these harsh
habitats, such as the dwarf juniper and dwarf willow (Salix herbacea).
Lower regions of the Lake District are home to the sundew (Drosera
rotundifolia), one of the UK's few carnivorous plants. Insects are
trapped within its leaves by a sticky mucilage (which glistens like
morning dew, hence its common name) - enzymes are then secreted
to digest the insect, releasing its nutrients for the plant.
Figure 8 Afly caught in the
carnivorous plant, Drosera rotundifolia,
common name, sundew. The fly is
attracted by the glistening droplets
at the tips of the tentacles, which
the insects then stick to. Proteolytic
enzymes secreted by the tentacles
digest the insect and the products are
absorbed by the leaf
Control of human activities
The role of the Lake District National Park Authority is like that of
Snowdonia - to conserve the region while enabling access for many
millions of visitors each year. Through the active management of the
countryside, for example, through replanting native tree species, this
fragile ecosystem is being secured for generations to come.
Summary questions
1 State three reasons why people might want to visit environmentally
sensitive areas.
(1 mark)
2 State one unique feature of:
a the Galapagos Islands
b Antarctica.
(2 marks)
3 Using a named region, state and explain how a human activity is controlled
to limit its effect on the populations of flora or fauna.
(4 marks)
Environmentally sensitive regions often receive many visitors
each year. State and explain the social and environmental impacts
on the region of this influx of people.
(6 marks)
653
24.8 Ecosystem management -
peat bogs
Specification reference: 6.3.2
A peat bog is a region of wet, spongy ground that contains
decomposing vegetation. Undisturbed peatland is a 'carbon sink',
meaning that it is a store of carbon dioxide. However, once dried,
peat can be used as a fuel. As well as releasing thermal energy,
burning peat releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. It takes
many thousands of years for peat bogs to form - the preservation of
existing peat bogs is therefore an important component in preventing
further climate change.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how ecosystems can
be managed to balance
the conflict between
conservation/preservation
and human needs.
As well as being used as a fuel, peat is also important for farmers
and gardeners, who mix it with soil to improve soil structure and to
increase acidity. Peat has very favourable moisture-retaining properties
when soil is dry, and prevents excess water killing roots when soil
is wet. Although peat can store nutrients, it is not fertile in itself.
Commercial peat extraction to supply gardeners and nursery growers
is a major threat to this ecosystem.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 23.3, Recycling
within ecosystems to remind
yourself of how carbon is recycled
in the carbon cycle.
Ecosystem
Peat forms when plant material is inhibited from
fully decaying by acidic and anaerobic conditions.
This normally occurs in wet or boggy areas, and
therefore peat is mainly composed of wetland
vegetation including mosses, sedges, and shrubs.
The plants that grow on peatlands, such as sphagnum
mosses (Sphagnum spp.), bog cotton or cottonsedge
(Eriophorum angustifolium), and heathers (typically
Calluna vulgaris), have adapted to grow and thrive in
wet conditions with few nutrients. Bogs also support
a wide range of insects such as butterflies, moths,
dragonflies, and damselflies. The lack of predators and
human disturbance makes some peatlands ideal for
birds to nest and bring up their chicks. The abundance
A Figure 1 Peat beds on the Somerset Levels. The peat from
of insects, spiders, and frogs, plus nutritious vegetation here is extracted and sold
and berries, provides food for many species. The large
areas of open ground provide ideal hunting grounds for birds of prey.
Loss of ecosystem
Lowland raised bogs are one example of a peatland ecosystem. They
are a rare and threatened habitat. In the UK, the area of relatively
undisturbed lowland raised bog is estimated to have diminished by
over 90%, from around 950km to only 60 in the last 100 years.
It is essential that the remaining areas are conserved to maintain
biodiversity – their maintenance will also contribute to flood
management, erosion control downstream, and carbon storage.
647
Module 6 Practice questions
d Where two or more individuals share any
resource that is insufficient to satisfy all their
requirements fully, then competition results.
(i) State two species, found in salt marsh
A, that are likely to be involved in
interspecific competition. (1 mark)
(ii) Name one resource for which these
plants will compete.
(1 mark)
The students were also interested in
measuring how the relative abundance
of the five species changed with elevation
above the mean sea level in the salt marsh.
Describe how this could be done. (4 marks)
OCR 2804 2009 (apart from a and b)
a The use of biosensors for the detection
of chemicals, such as glucose and
organophosphates, has proved to be a
reliable alternative to other methods.
Glucose biosensors, first developed in the
1980s, enable diabetics conveniently and
easily to monitor their blood glucose. The
diagram shows the key components of
one type of glucose biosensor.
(i) Explain how water and food supplies
may contain organophosphates.
(2 marks)
(ii) Many organophosphates
are irreversible inhibitors of
acetylcholinesterase.
Explain why this makes them
harmful to human health. (2 marks)
(iii) The equation summarises the reaction
catalysed by acetylcholinesterase.
acetylcholinesterase
acetylcholine + H,O
Se> choline +
acetate
(acetic acid)
8
.O A
sample of blood
containing mixture
of molecules
membrane
b
glucose
glucose oxidase
enzyme
Design a simple biosensor using
acetylcholinesterase to detect
the presence of a harmful
organophosphate in a sample of river
water. Include explanations for each
element of your design.
You may wish to draw a labelled
diagram help you answer. (5 marks)
(iv) Suggest the advantages of
organophosphate biosensors compared
with other detection methods. (3 marks)
Using genetic modification, crop plants
resistant to the herbicide glyphosate can
be produced.
Glyphosate does not act on
acetylcholinesterase but inhibits other
enzyme systems.
(i) Explain why a different biosensor to
that used in (a)(iii) and (iv) would
need to be developed to detect
glyphosate in a sample of river water.
(2 marks)
(ii) Suggest one advantage and
one disadvantage of producing
glyphosate-resistant crop plants.
(2 marks)
Crop plants can be genetically modified
for glyphosate resistance by using a
restriction endonuclease and DNA ligase.
Describe the roles of these two enzymes
in genetic manipulation. (4 marks)
OCR 2805/04 2008
products
transducer
00:32]
amplifier
processor
digital read-out
The development of organophosphate
biosensors has benefits for health care and
environmental monitoring.
With the increasing demand for food
production, the use of organophosphates as
insecticides to protect crops has increased.
However, organophosphates can remain in
the environment and are potentially toxic
to humans and other animals.
661
POPULATIONS AND SUSTAINABILITY
24
Discuss any conclusions that could be
reached on analysis of these results. (4 marks)
The graph shows the changes in numbers
of blue whales in the Antarctic over last
hundred or so years.
300000
ô 250000
200000
150000
100000
50000
estimated population size
0
1900
1920
1940 1960
year
1980
2000
a (i) Name the process summarised
in the diagram that changes a
lake community into a peat bog
community.
(1 mark)
(ii) Using the flow diagram, list two
abiotic factors that play a role in
determining what species of plant can
grow in an area.
(2 marks)
b Most of the minerals in a peant bog are
held withing the living plants at all times,
not in the soil.
Plants like bog cotton and bog
asphodel recycle the minerals they
contain,
The leaves of these plants turn orange
as the chlorophyll within them is
broken down.
Minerals such as magnesium ions are
transported from the leaves to the
plants' roots for storage.
Describe one similarity and two differences
in mineral recycling in a peat bog and in a
deciduous forest.
(3 marks)
In Ireland in 2002, two well-preserved
Iron-age bodies were found in peat
bogs. Despite having been dead for over
two thousand years, the bodies had not
decomposed. They had skin, hair, and
muscle.
Suggest why these bodies had not
decomposed
(2 marks)
d Suggest two reasons why the large scale
removal of peat from bogs for use in
gardens is discouraged by conservation
groups.
(2 marks)
OCR 2805/03 2010
d State, giving your reason(s), whether the
outlook for the blue whale population is
good or not.
(3 marks)
Peat bogs are large areas of waterlogged land
that support a specialised community of plants.
Peat bogs take thousands of years to form.
The flow diagram shows the main stages in
the formation of a peat bog.
3
Bull rushes and reeds grow in the shallow
water round the margins of a mineral-rich lake.
Dead plant remains accumulate at the margins
and trap sediment, which begins to fill the lake.
Different plants now grow, including brown
mosses, which form a floating carpet iſ the
water level rises.
New specialised plants grown on the floating
brown moss carpet, because it is mineral
deficient and acidic.
Sphagnum mosses colonise, increasing the
acidity further raising the bog higher, away from
sources of minerals.
Plants such as heather, bog cotton, bog asphodel,
and carnivorous plants colonise the Sphagnum
moss and form a mature peat bog community.
655
Module 6 Summary
mitosis
Module 1
control of
gene expression
ethics
of cloning
mutations
Module 4
monogenics
dihybrid
inheritance,
linkage
genetic
control
of body
plans and
form
cloning
in plants
cellular
control
variation
Module 4
cloning
in animals
students
ftest
test
Patterns of
inheritance and
variation
x=510-E)
genetics
and evolution
Cloning and
biotechnology
microorganisms
in biotechnology
factors
affecting
evolution
Hardy-
Weinberg
principle
serial
dilutions
culturing
microorganism
artificial
selection
standard
growth curves
use of
immobilised
enzymes
Module 1
DNA
structure
DNA + gene
sequencing
Manipulating
genomes
genetics, evolution
and ecostems
Module 6
biological
molecules
Module 1
enzymes
Module 1
DNA
profiles
genetic
engineering and
gene therapy
PCR
efficiency
calculations
Ecosystems
limiting
factors
biomass
transfers
ecosystems
Populations
and sustainability
conservation
and preservation
recycling of
nutrients
distribution and
abundance
sustainable
resources
primary
progression
human impact
and ecosystem
management
estimated no. in
population (m-2) =
no. of individuals in sample
area of sample (m²)
estimated population size =
no. of individuals in first sample x
no. of individuals in second sample
number of recaptured
male individuals
656
24.7 Ecosystem management -
Terai region of Nepal
Specification reference: 6.3.2
The southern part of Nepal contains a rich agricultural area known
as the Terai region. It stretches along Nepal's southern border with
India, with a width of around 25–30 km. The Terai lowlands are
defined by a belt of well-watered floodplains stretching from the
Indian border in the south to the slopes of the Bhabhar and Siwalik
mountain ranges to the north.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how ecosystems can
be managed to balance
the conflict between
conservation/preservation
and human needs.
The land of the Terai region is fertile, and is the main agricultural
region of the country. Alongside farming, people are engaged in
a range of trades, industries, and services. As a result of the high
population density, natural resources are at risk of being overused.
Ecosystem
The region is hot and humid in the summer months, and is composed
of a fertile alluvial soil which is rich in plant nutrients. The Terai is an
area of extreme biodiversity - many subtropical plants are found in
this region including pipal and bamboo. There are also large areas of
thick forest where animals such as the Bengal tiger, the sloth bear, and
the Indian rhinoceros can be found.
A Figure 1 Bengal tigers can be found
roaming the forests of Nepal
Millions of people depend on the Terai forests for their livelihoods.
They are also an important source of national income. Primarily as
a result of poverty and corruption, large areas of forest have been
cleared for agriculture or to sell the timber.
The removal of large parts of the forest has also exacerbated the
effects of monsoon flooding, causing severe disruption to communities
downstream. If deforestation of the region continues unabated, the
communities of the Terai would be left with only small, isolated
pockets of forest. This would be devastating not only for the wildlife of
the region, but also for the local population who rely on the forests for
income through tourism, and through harvesting wood for building
products and for burning as fuel.
Figure 2 Royal Chitwan National
Park, which is located in the Terai region
of Nepal
CHINA
Mahendranagar
Dhangadhi
NEPAL
Sustainable forest management in Nepal
The aim of sustainable forest management is to
provide a livelihood for local people, ensure the
conservation of forests, and provide the Nepali state
with considerable income for general development.
This is being achieved through supportive national
legislation, and through the development of local
community forestry groups.
The local groups develop their own operational plans,
set harvesting rules, set rates and prices for products,
and determine how surplus income is distributed or
spent. Through the creation of cooperative networks,
Pokhara
Nepalgunj
KATHMANDU
. Bhaktapur
Bharatpur Patan
Siddharthanagar
Terai region
*Hetauda
INDIA
Birgunj
Janakpurdham
Dharan
Biratnagar
Figure 3 Map of Nepal showing Terai region
645
24
POPULATIONS AND SUSTAINABILITY
Limiting factors
In theory, if all resources were in plentiful supply a population would
continue to grow exponentially. However, this is rarely seen in nature.
Instead, a short period of exponential growth occurs when conditions
are ideal and the maximum growth rate is achieved.
Limiting factors prevent further growth of a population and in
some cases cause it to decline. Examples of limiting factors include
competition between the organisms for resources, the build-up of the
toxic by-products of metabolism, or disease.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 23.1,
Ecosystems to remind yourself
of the effect of abiotic and biotic
factors on organisms.
Study tip
Limiting factors can be divided into abiotic and biotic factors:
• Abiotic factors - these non-living factors include temperature,
light, pH, the availability of water or oxygen, and humidity.
Biotic factors – these living factors include predators, disease, and
competition.
The maximum population size that an environment can support is known
as its carrying capacity (Figure 1), although individual years can show
slight increases or decreases in population size. The population size remains
stable as the number of births and deaths are approximately equal.
Competition is often considered to
be the most important biotic factor
controlling population density. You
will find out about competition in
more detail in 24.2, Competition.
Migration
Another important variable which affects population size is migration:
Immigration - the movement of individual organisms into a
particular area increases population size. For example, millions
of Christmas Island red crabs (Gecarcoidea natalis) migrate each
year from forest to coast to reproduce, dramatically increasing the
coastal population of red crabs.
Emigration - the movement of individual organisms away from a
particular area decreases population size. For example, the Norway
Lemming (Lemmius lemmus) emigrates away from areas of high
population density or poor habitat.
A Figure 3 Snow Geese breed in the
Arctic Tundra, and winter in farmlands on
the American south coast. They make an
annual round trip journey of more than
8000 km at speeds of more than 80 km/h,
changing the population density of geese
in each place dramatically as they arrive
and depart
Density independent factors
Density independent factors are factors that have an effect on the
whole population regardless of its size. These can dramatically change
population size. These factors include earthquakes, fires, volcanic
eruptions, and storms. In some cases, these factors can remove whole
populations of a species from a region.
T
Human population growth
For many years the human population remained fairly
stable, as is the case for other natural populations. The
population was kept in check by limiting factors.
The development of agriculture, the industrial revolution,
and advances in medicine have led to a population
explosion. Like other species, the growth of the human
population is a result of the imbalance between birth rate
and death rate.
1 Suggest two limiting factors that historically kept
the human population at a constant level.
631
24
24.1 Population size
Population
increased
exponentially
The future size of a population depends upon the number
of women of child-bearing age. The age and gender
demographic of a population can be represented using an
age population pyramid, as shown in Figure 5.
Prior to 10 000 years
ago, disease or
famine produced
regular population
crashes and kept
numbers fairly
constant
number of humans / billions
NW 010
% males
A % females
The human
population slowly
increased, but
was still checked
by diseases, e.g.
the Black Death
The Black Death
(bubonic plague)
80+
75-79
70-74
65-69
60-64
55-59
50-54
45-49
age / years
500 000 10 000
years ago years ago
400 Today
years ago
20-24
15-19
10-14
5-9
10 8
8 10
6 4 2 0 2 4 6
% of total population
% males
% females
A Figure 4 Human population growth curve
Scientists use a measure to calculate how much a
population has grown in a certain period of time. This is
calculated using the formula:
Population population change during the period
x 100
growth (%) population at the start of the period
If the result is positive, the population has grown. If it is
negative, the population has decreased.
2 The human population was approximately 3 billion
(3 x 109) in 1960. This had risen to 6.8 billion
(6.8 x 10) by 2010. Calculate the percentage
population growth during this period.
80+
75-79
70-74
65-69
60-64
55-59
50-54
9
age / years
more
A number of factors affect the birth rate of the human
population. In addition to 'natural' limiting factors, economic
conditions, cultural and religious backgrounds, and social
pressures can limit - or encourage - the birth rate.
15-19
10-14
5-9
0-4
10 8 6 4 2 0 2 4 6 8 10
% of total population
A Figure 5 Age population pyramids for
two different countries
Different factors affect the death rate in a population.
These include the age profile of the population (in general,
the greater the proportion of elderly people, the higher the
death rate), the quality of medical care, food availability
and quality, and the effects of natural disaster or war.
4
a
Explain how the population of each of the
countries represented in Figure 5 will change
over time.
Sketch or suggest the shape of an age
population pyramid for a stable population.
3
b
Suggest and explain a social, cultural, or religious
pressure which may affect the size of a population.
Summary questions
1 State three factors that would cause an increase in
population size.
(3 marks)
3 Sketch and annotate a graph to show what would
happen to the population of duckweed (Lemna minor)
if a few individuals were introduced into a new pond
habitat.
(6 marks)
2 Describe what happens during a period of exponential
population growth
(2 marks)
632
24
24.7 Ecosystem management - Terai region of Nepal
small forestry businesses can work effectively together-for example, to
gain Forestry Stewardship Council (FSC) certification, an international
Standard which rewards sustainable forestry.
There have been several successes for the community forestry groups:
Figure 4 Community forestry has
contributed to restoring forest resources
in Nepal. Forests account for almost
40% of the land in Nepal - however, this
area was decreasing at an annual rate of
1.9% during the 1990s. Since 2000 this
decline has been reversed, and forest
coverage is now increasing
· Significant improvement in the conservation of the forested
regions, both in terms of increased area and improved density.
Improved soil and water management across the region.
• An increase in the retail price of forestry products, and so a greater
economic input to the region.
Employment and income generation through forest protection,
as well as through the production of non-timber forest products.
Sustainable wood fuel sources, which contribute three-quarters
of the local household energy needs.
• Securing the biodiversity of the forested areas.
Promoting sustainable agriculture
The Terai requires a range of management strategies for sustainable
land use, to prevent damage of the ecosystem including the further
degradation of the Terai forests. These include:
promoting the production of fruits and vegetables in the hills and
mountain regions to avoid further intensification of the Terai
. improving irrigation facilities to enhance crop production
• multiple cropping, where more than one crop is grown on a piece
of land each growing season
the growth of nitrogen-fixing crops such as pulses and legumes to
enhance the fertility of the soil
growing crop varieties resistant to various soil, climatic, and biotic
challenges through the use of modern biotechnology and genetic
engineering
improving fertilisation techniques to enhance crop yields - for
example, using manure to improve the nutrient content of the soil.
Through the implementation of sustainable forestry and agricultural
practices, the Terai region is now being managed in a manner that will
secure both the biodiversity of the region, and the economic welfare of
its residents for the future.
Summary questions
1 Describe the ecosystem of the Terai region of Nepal.
(2 marks)
2 State two ways humans use the Terai region of Nepal.
(1 mark)
3 Explain how sustainable forestry and agricultural practices
are being used in the Terai region to maintain biodiversity,
while also meeting the needs of the local population.
(4 marks)
646
POPULATIONS AND
SUSTAINABILITY
24.1 Population size
Specification reference: 6.3.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
► the factors that determine
size of a population
→ the impact of limiting factors
on carrying capacity and final
population size.
The human population is increasing at a significant rate. The global
population has grown from one billion in 1800 to seven billion in
2012, and is predicted to reach 11 billion by the end of this century.
Population growth like this cannot be sustained indefinitely as
limiting factors, such as the availability of food, will prevent
the population rising above a certain level. A limiting factor is an
environmental resource or constraint that limits population growth.
Population growth curve
If the growth of a new population over time is plotted on a graph,
regardless of the organism, most natural populations will show the
same characteristics. This is known as a population growth curve.
carrying capacity
stable state,
no growth
The graph can be divided into three main phases:
number of organisms
slow
growth
rapid
growth
time
A Figure 1 Growth curve of most
natural populations. This is often referred
to as a sigmoid population growth curve
Phase 1 - a period of slow growth. The small numbers of individuals
that are initially present reproduce increasing the total population.
As the birth rate is higher than the death rate, the population
increases in size.
Phase 2 - a period of rapid growth. As the number of breeding
individuals increases, the total population multiplies exponentially.
No constraints act to limit the population explosion.
Phase 3 - a stable state. Further population growth is prevented by
external constraints. During this time the population size fluctuates,
but overall its size remains relatively stable. Birth rates and death
rates are approximately equal. Slight increases and decreases can be
accounted for by fluctuations in limiting factors, such the presence
of predators.
Synoptic link
You learnt about bacterial growth
curves in Topic 22.6, Culturing
microorganisms in the laboratory.
population of bacteria
180000001
16000000
& 14000000
12000000
10000000
8000000
6000000
4000000
2000000
population of bacteria
10000000001
100000000+
10000000 +
1000000 +
100000 +
10000+
1000+
100+
10+
2
4
6
8
10
16
18
20
22
24
2
4
6
8
10
16
18
20
22
24
12 14
time/h
12 14
time/h
Figure 2a Exponential growth curve. The size of the
population doubles each time a fixed time period elapses.
The populations of many organisms follow this trend during
an initial expansion of population size
A Figure 2b Exponential growth represented on a logarithmic
scale. Where data span several orders of magnitude, it is often
more appropriate to plot the data using a logarithmic scale on the
relevant axis. In this case, population size covers a large range
of values-therefore this data (y-axis) is plotted on a logarithmic
scale, whereas time (x-axis) is plotted on a linear scale
630
24
24.6 Ecosystem management - Masai Mara
A number of scientific research projects have been (or are currently
being) undertaken in the Masai Mara. These include:
Michigan State University, studying the behaviour and physiology
of the predator spotted hyena.
Subalusky and Dutton, completing a flow assessment for the Mara
River Basin. The aim of this research is to identify the river flows
needed to provide for both the basic human needs of the million
people who depend on the water, and to sustain the ecosystem in
its current form.
• The Mara Predator Project, which catalogues and monitors lion
populations throughout the region. The project aims to identify
population trends and responses to changes in land management,
human settlements, livestock movements, and tourism.
The Mara-Meru Cheetah Project, which aims to monitor the
cheetah population and evaluate the impact of human activity on
cheetah behaviour and survival.
Summary questions
1 Describe the ecosystem
of the Masai Mara. (1 mark)
2 State two ways in which
humans use the lands
of the Masai Mara (1 mark)
Striking a balance
Some human land uses in Masai Mara are incompatible with wildlife
survival - increasing wildlife density also threatens pastoral and
cultivation lifestyles. A constant balance has to be maintained between
the human and animal populations. For example:
• Elephants, in particular, threaten cultivation. Large elephant
populations are often responsible for crop trampling and damage
to homesteads. Other grazing animals may also eat the crops. To
prevent these problems land may be fenced, but this has a negative
effect on natural migration.
Legal hunting is used to cull excess animals. This can successfully
maintain population numbers and bring in considerable amounts
of money for conservation work. However, numbers must be
constantly monitored to ensure that levels are sufficient to
maintain the natural balance within the ecosystem.
Livestock also faces threats from migratory wildlife. For example
during the annual wildebeest migration, the wildebeest outcompete
cattle for grass. Diseases are introduced to the domesticated animal
populations. Equally, the domesticated cattle eat vegetation that
could be used by migrating zebras and wildebeest, and diseases can
spread from the domestic to the wild animals.
As the human population expands more homes are required as
well as land for cattle and agriculture. Evidence suggests that
wildlife density declines significantly as the density of the built
environment rises.
3 Explain how and why local
Masai tribes have changed
their style of farming in
recent years. (4 marks)
4 The Masai Mara region receives
around 300 000 visitors each
year. State and explain the
positive and negative impacts
of this influx of people on
the region. (6 marks)
644
Module 6 Practice questions
mean weight of harvested fish (g)
82
Fishing regulations usually require that only
The results are shown in the graph.
fish above a certain size are caught and kept.
Smaller fish are thrown back into the sea.
small fish
The North East arctic cod have been studied
removed
for many years and the average fish size has
changed during this period.
fish removed
The changes are summarised in the table.
randomly
(control)
Time period Weight (kg) Length (cm)
large fish
1930s
5.1
85
removed
1970s
4.6
0 i 2 3 4
2000s
3.2
73
generation
a Describe how the fish have changed over
(i) Compare the trends shown in the
the period of study shown in the diagram.
graph.
(4 marks)
(4 marks)
(ii) Explain the changes in fish size over
An investigation was conducted using
the four generations shown by the
tank-reared Atlantic silversides. These
graph.
(5 marks)
are small, fast-growing fish that are not
Suggest whether this is a form of artificial
usually eaten.
or natural selection.
(5 marks)
Researchers removed 90% of the fish
2 a Define the following terms: Genome,
from the tank every year and allowed the
Operon, Expression.
(6 marks)
survivors to reproduce.
b Compare the roles of regulatory and
The fish removed from each tank were
structural genes.
(4 marks)
chosen in three different ways:
The diagram summarises the operon
1 The largest fish were removed
responsible for the synthesis of the amino
from one tank.
acid tryptophan.
structural genes
2 The smallest fish were
regulatory gene operator promoter trpEtrpctroDtrpB trpA
removed from another tank.
RNA
3 The fish were removed
polymerase
transcription
randomly from a third tank.
repressor protein
tryptophan
structural genes
trpc trpD trpB
regulatory genel operator
promoter troE
trpa
RNA
polymerase
repressor protein
tryptophan
tryptophan
regulatory gene
structural genes
operator promoter trpE trpc troD trpB
repressor protein
trpA
tryptophan
RNA
polymerase
658
Module 6 Genetics, evolution, and ecosystems summary
Application
DNA profiling, popularly referred to as DNA
fingerprinting, has been used as a form of evidence
since 1988 to help prove guilt or innocence in police
investigations. The number of areas of DNA used to
make the profile has been increased since the early
days. Until recently DNA profiling for use in criminal
trials in England and Wales involved 11 DNA regions.
This has been increased to 17 areas in a new process
known as DNA-17.
DNA-17 is a more sensitive test and it can be used in
conjunction with PCR) to get a DNA profile from small
quantities of DNA, poor quality samples, and from
older cells. This should make it more useful than
ever - it will be particularly important in resolving
old cases which have been impossible to solve using
previous techniques. Advantages include improved
discrimination between the profiles of different
people (reducing the probability of a chance match
between unrelated people), improved sensitivity (so
less DNA needed), and improved comparability with
the profiles used in the rest of the EU and beyond,
where DNA-17 has been the standard for longer.
Possible disadvantages include an increased
chance of partial matches from poor samples when
more regions are used. Also the test is so sensitive
that it is more likely to pick up traces of DNA from
innocent parties
1 a Why are DNA profiles used in forensic evidence, rather
than, for example, specific proteins?
b Why is DNA profiling used rather than DNA sequencing
in forensic cases and paternity testing?
2 a Summarise the importance of PCR in DNA profiling
b A limitation in the initial technology meant that a
limited number of primers were supplied. As a result, in
some individuals with a particular mutation the primers
did not bind so poor profiles were produced.
i Explain what a primer is and what it does
ii Discuss how a mutation could prevent the binding
of the primers
iii Suggest how this problem could be overcome.
3 a Consider the three advantages of the new test given
here and give a scientific explanation for each of them.
improved discrimination between the profiles of
different people: The more regions of DNA that are
analysed to produce a DNA profile, the smaller the
chance that two unrelated individuals will have the
same pattern of introns. The more regions used in
the test, therefore, the less likely it is that errors of
identification will be made
improved sensitivity
• improved comparability with the profiles used in the
rest of the EU and beyond.
b Suggest explanations for the disadvantages suggested:
increased chance of partial matches from poor samples
when more regions are used:
the test is so sensitive that it is more likely to pick up
traces of DNA from innocent parties.
SGM (second generation multiplex) target areas
WA
THOI D81179 FGA
FGA
D2
D21811 018851
D1855
SGMPlus target areas
D2S1338 0163539D195433 D3S1358
DNA 17 target areas
A Figure 1 The increase in the DNA target areas used in the three most
recent DNA profiling technologies used in English and Welsh courts
D151656 D15441 P10S1248 D1253912251048
SE33
Extension
Investigate the story of the development of DNA profiling
and the way it was first used to both prove a man
innocent and to prove another man, Colin Pitchfork, guilty.
Write an account of the story EITHER: for a newspaper
with a view to increasing the public understanding of the
science of DNA profiling and updating it to mention the
introduction of DNA-17
OR: for a popular science magazine, again bringing the story
up to date with the way the technology has developed since.
657
24
POPULATIONS AND SUSTAINABILITY
Cultivation
The level of cultivation around the region of the Masai Mara has
increased in recent years. As grassland has been converted into cropland,
natural vegetation is removed, and nutrients in the soil are used up.
Over time this leads to a reliance on fertilisers for effective crop growth.
Ecotourism
The Masai Mara relies on tourism for most of its economic input.
Thousands of people travel to the region each year, eager to
see for themselves the vast numbers of animals present in their
natural habitat. Ecotourism is tourism directed towards natural
environments, to support conservation efforts and observe wildlife. It
is a type of sustainable development which aims to reduce the impact
that tourism has on naturally beautiful environments. This is usually
seen as a less invasive use of land than agriculture.
A Figure 3 Increasing numbers of
tourists who have come to see the
wildlife also visit local Masai tribes
to observe their way of life and their
traditional dances
The key principles of ecotourism are to:
• ensure that tourism does not exploit the natural environment or
local communities
consult and engage with local communities on planned developments
ensure that infrastructure improvements benefit local people as
well as visitors.
Ecotourism, however, can have negative impacts on the ecosystem.
There is evidence that tourist movements such as the repeated use of
hiking trails, or the use of mechanised transport, may contribute to
soil erosion and other habitat changes.
Figure 4 Most tourists take part in
organised safari tours to try and spot
the 'big five' - the African lion, African
elephant, Cape buffalo, African leopard,
and rhinoceros
Conservation and research
The nature reserve plays an important role in the conservation of
endangered species. Some of the most popular large mammals have
experienced population declines in recent years - beyond those
expected from climate or natural variation.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 11.8, Methods
for maintaining biodiversity for
more information on the IUCN.
Black rhinos are one of the most endangered animals in Africa, and
appear on the IUCN critically endangered list. Despite the trade being
illegal, rhino horn is in huge demand, particularly for use in traditional
medicine in south-east Asia. People are lured into poaching by the vast
sums of money offered to trade in this material.
In 1972, over 100 rhinos lived in the Masai Mara. By 1982, illegal
poaching meant that only a handful remained. An active conservation
and protection programme was established to encourage a balance
between the needs of local communities and those of the wildlife.
The programme included the employment of reserve rangers, and the
provision of communication equipment, vehicles, and other necessary
equipment and infrastructure. These measures have helped to deter
poachers from entering the reserve and by the mid-1990s rhino
numbers had increased significantly, although it will be some time
before population levels return to those seen in the early 1970s.
A Figure 5 The black rhinoceros
(Diceros bicornis)
643
24.2 Competition
Specification reference: 6.3.2
In the previous topic, you learnt that population size is influenced by
limiting factors. Organisms compete for resources including food, shelter,
space, and light. As a result, competition between organisms has a
significant effect on the number of organisms present in a particular area.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ interspecific and intraspecific
competition.
Types of competition
Competition is an example of a biotic limiting factor - it is a result of
the interactions between living organisms. There are two main types
of competition:
1 Interspecific competition - competition between different species.
2 Intraspecific competition - competition between members of
the same species.
Interspecific competition
Interspecific competition occurs when two or more different species of
organism compete for the same resource. This interaction results in a
reduction of the resource available to both populations. For example,
if both species compete for the same food source, there will usually
be less available for organisms of each species. As a result of less food,
organisms will have less energy for growth and reproduction, resulting
in smaller populations than if only one of the species had been present.
Figure 1 The bog pondweed
(Potamogeton polygonifolius, broad
leaves) and duckweed (Lemna minor,
small floating leaves) growing in this
pond are both competing for light. This is
an example of interspecific competition.
In the absence of the pond weed, the
duckweed would multiply to cover the
whole surface of the pond
If two species of organism, however, are both competing for the same
food source but one is better adapted, the less well adapted species is
likely to be outcompeted. If conditions remain the same, the less well
adapted species will decline in number until it can no longer exist in
the habitat alongside the better adapted species. This is known as the
competitive exclusion principle - where two species are competing for
limited resources, the one that uses the resources more effectively will
ultimately eliminate the other.
Synoptic link
You learnt about biotic and abiotic
factors in Topic 23.1, Ecosystems.
Red and grey squirrels in the UK
An example of interspecific competition is the competition between
red and grey squirrels for food and territory in the UK. In the 1870s
the grey squirrel, a native of North America, was
introduced into the wild in the UK. Its population
quickly increased in numbers and resulted in the
native red squirrel disappearing from many areas.
This is primarily because the grey squirrel can eat
a wider range of food than the red squirrel and
as it is larger it can store more fat. This increases
its chances of survival and therefore its ability
to reproduce thus increasing its population. An
increasing population of grey squirrels further
A Figure 2 The red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris) is native to the UK.
reduces the food supply available to the red
The introduction of the grey squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis) from
squirrels, reducing their ability to survive and
North America has led to a significant decline in red squirrel numbers
reproduce.
633
24.5 Sustainability
Specification reference: 6.3.2
An increasing global human population results in the need for more
resources. To survive at a basic level you require uncontaminated food
and water supplies, shelter, clothing, and access to medical care when
the need arises. To live in the manner to which you are accustomed,
many more resources are required.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how the management of
an ecosystem can provide
resources in a sustainable way.
To cope with the increased human demand for resources, intensive
methods have been used to exploit environmental resources. This can
result in the destruction of ecosystems, a reduction in biodiversity, and
the depletion of resources.
Sustainable use of resources
The world's natural resources have conflicting demands placed upon
them. To conserve natural resources for future generations, sustainable
management of the natural environment is necessary. A sustainable
resource is a renewable resource that is being economically exploited
in such a way that it will not diminish or run out.
The aims of sustainability are to:
RECYCLABLE PACKAGING
preserve the environment
ensure resources are available for future generations
allow humans in all societies to live comfortably
enable less economically developed countries (LEDCs) to develop,
through exploiting their natural resources
create a more even balance in the consumption of these resources
between more economically developed countries (MEDCs) and
LEDCs.
Alongside the sustainable management of resources, existing resources
should be used more efficiently. This helps to prevent finite resources
being used up so quickly. For example, many products can be reused -
others, such as aluminium cans, can be recycled into new products.
A Figure 1 The UK government
has a campaign to 'Reduce, Reuse,
Recycle'. Reduce means lowering your
consumption of physical objects and
natural resources. Reuse refers to
reusing objects in their current form.
Recycle means to break an item down
into its raw materials, to be used for the
manufacture of new items
As technology improves, alternatives may be developed that could
ease the strain on current finite resources. However, these new
resources may take many years to develop, be more costly, and have
negative environmental effects of their own.
Sustainable timber production
The sustainable management of forests is possible. This allows for the
maintenance of a forest's biodiversity, while sustaining both our supply of
wood to meet demands and the economic viability of timber production.
The techniques used depend on the scale of timber production.
Small-scale timber production
To produce sustainable timber on a small scale, a technique known
as coppicing is often used. This is a technique where a tree trunk is cut
close to the ground. New shoots form from the cut surface and mature.
A Figure 2 A hazel coppiced woodland.
Some ash trees are left to grow to
maturity - the remaining coppice trees
are cut to ground level every 7-10 years
to provide a constant supply of small
wood. The woodland is thus divided into
a series of areas cut in different years,
ensuring a continuous supply of wood
639
24
24.5 Sustainability
un-coppiced
newly coppiced —
mature coppice
Eventually these shoots are cut and in their place more are
produced. These shoots have many uses, including fencing.
In most managed woodlands, rotational coppicing
takes place. The woodland is divided into sections and
trees are only cut in a particular section until all have
been coppiced. Coppicing then begins in another area
allowing time for the newly coppiced trees to grow. This
before cut close following spring 7-20 yrs later process continues until you reach the trees that were
tree to be to base in shoots rapidly coppice ready
first coppiced. These will now have grown to mature-
coppiced winter regrow from stool for harvest
sized trees, and the cycle begins again.
Figure 3 Stages of coppicing in a woodland
Rotational coppicing maintains biodiversity as the trees never grow
enough to block out the light. Hence, succession cannot occur and so
more species can survive.
An alternative technique to coppicing which may be used is pollarding.
The technique is similar to coppicing, but the trunk is cut higher up so
deer and other animals cannot eat the new shoots as they appear.
Large-scale timber production
Sustainable timber production on a large scale is based around the
technique of felling large areas of forest. The felled trees are destroyed
and will not regrow.
To ensure that production is sustainable, timber companies:
A Figure 4 Pollarded alder tree (Alnus
glutinosa) at a walled field boundary.
This pollarding was recent. Pollarding is
a wood-management technique in which
all growth is removed from the tree
above 2-3 metres at intervals of several
years. This provides a regular supply of
wood, and has the incidental benefit of
prolonging the lifespan of the tree
• Practise selective cutting, which involves removing only the
largest trees.
Replace trees through replanting rather than waiting for natural
regeneration. This also helps to ensure that the biodiversity and
mineral and water cycles are maintained.
Plant trees an optimal distance apart to reduce competition. This
results in higher yields as more wood is produced per tree.
Manage pests and pathogens to maximise yields.
Ensure that areas of forest remain for indigenous people.
The major disadvantage of this technique is that habitats are
destroyed, soil minerals are reduced, and the bare soil which is left is
susceptible to erosion. Trees are important for binding soil together,
removing water from soil, and maintaining nutrient levels through
their role in the carbon and nitrogen cycles.
Sustainable fishing
As well as the increased demand for fuel and buildings created as a
result of population growth, the demand for food is ever-increasing.
Fish provide a valuable source of protein within the human diet.
However, overfishing has led to the populations of some species of
fish decreasing significantly. These fish populations are then unable
to regenerate, meaning that they will no longer be able to provide us
with a food source in the future.
A Figure 5 Fishermen sorting out their
catch ready for market. Fishing quotas
vary depending on the species of fish.
Scientists study different species to
determine how big their population
needs to be for the species to maintain
its numbers
To try to overcome this problem international agreements are made about
the number of fish that can be caught. An example of this is the Common
640
24
24.2 Competition
Study tip
Intraspecific competition
Intraspecific competition occurs when members of the same species
compete for the same resource. The availability of the resource
determines the population size - the greater the availability the larger
the population that can be supported. This results in fluctuations in
the number of organisms present in a particular population over time.
To explain how a limiting factor
affects the size of a population,
you must link its effect to the birth
and death rates of an organism.
For example, an increase in food
supply could simply result in larger
individuals. Only if the increase
in size increases the organism's
survival chance (for instance
through the winter) and therefore
reproductive success will it
increase the population size.
The effects of intraspecific competition on a population are represented
in Figure 3.
stage 2
number of
organisms
stage 1
wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
stage 3
time
A Figure 3 The effects of intraspecific competition over time
Stage 1 - When a resource is plentiful in a habitat (such as food or
space), all organisms have enough of the resource to survive and
reproduce. This results in an increase in population size.
Stage 2 - As a result of the increased population, there are many
more individuals that share the food or space available. Resources
are now limited; not enough is available for all organisms to
survive. The population will decrease in size.
Stage 3 - Less competition exists as the smaller population means
less organisms are competing for the same resources. This means
more organisms survive and reproduce, resulting in population
growth.
This cycle of events will then repeat.
Figure 4 Robins compete for
breeding territory. Each territory provides
adequate food for one family of birds. If
food is scarce, territories have to become
larger, therefore there are fewer breeding
pairs and a smaller population
Summary questions
1 State the difference between interspecific and
intraspecific competition.
(1 mark)
2 Describe the cycle of population size changes that occur
following intraspecific competition.
(3 marks)
3 Oak tree saplings compete with each other for light, water,
and minerals.
a State the type of competition that exists between oak
tree saplings.
b Suggest how the population of oak trees will vary
over time.
(1 mark)
(3 marks)
634
24.6 Ecosystem management -
Masai Mara
Specification reference: 6.3.2
The Masai Mara National Reserve (MMNR) in southern Kenya is an
example of an ecosystem that is actively managed to balance the needs
of humans and the need for conservation. The reserve was established
as a wildlife sanctuary in 1961, and covers around 1500 km2- it is
situated approximately 1500-2000 m above sea level.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how ecosystems can
be managed to balance
the conflict between
conservation/preservation
and human needs.
Ecosystem
The MMNR is primarily a savannah ecosystem, divided by the main
Mara river. The fertile regions close to the river are a combination of
rich grasslands and woodland - further from the river are open plains
with scattered shrubs and trees. The region is famous for its annual
zebra and wildebeest migrations and is home to a wide range of large
mammals, including buffalo, elephants, leopards, lions, and black
rhinos.
In the past, the region was dominated by the acacia bush. This provided
a habitat for the tsetse fly which is a carrier of African trypanosomiasis
(sleeping sickness). To attempt to reduce incidences of the disease,
government workers and indigenous communities have cleared major
tracts of acacia over the last 50 years. Elephants, fire, and cattle grazing
have further reduced the presence of acacia and other woody plants.
Figure 1 Wildebeest running in the
grassland of the Masai Mara
Farming
Grazing
Traditionally the Masai Mara has been used
by local tribes for livestock grazing. In the
past, the Masai practised a traditional method
of farming known as semi-nomadic farming.
Tribes frequently moved depending on climate
variation and the presence of tsetse flies.
This allowed vegetation time to recover from
animal grazing whenever the farmers moved
on to another area.
Figure 2 The Reserve is named after the local Masai tribes, whose
land surrounds the Reserve. Their homes were set up in groups of huts
surrounding an enclosed area in which cattle were housed. Each night,
the families would bring their livestock into the enclosure in order to
prevent predation and cattle theft
Grazing is now limited to areas on the edge of
the reserve, as local tribes are prevented from
entering the park. Populations have grown in
these marginal areas. Larger herds graze the
grassland areas, and more trees are removed
for fuel. As the vegetation is removed, the risk
of soil erosion increases.
642
24
24.3 Predator-prey relationships
Canadian lynx and snowshoe hare
When a predator feeds on just one type of prey, there
is an interdependence between the predator and prey
populations. This means that changes in the population
of one animal directly affect the population of the
other.
The Canadian lynx and snowshoe hare have an
interdependent relationship. This relationship has been
widely studied - data exist for over 200 years, as records
were kept for the number of lynx furs that were traded in
Canada. The data collected is shown in Figure 3.
1 Suggest what assumption was made by scientists
when estimating population size from the number
of furs traded.
2 a State in which year the hare population was at its
highest
b Suggest a reason for this.
3 a State in which year the lynx population is at its
lowest
b Suggest a reason for this.
State the approximate time delay between a peak and
trough occurring in the snowshoe hare population.
5 Explain the changes in the populations of the lynx
and hare that occurred over time.
large increase in
hare population
followed by large
increase in lynx
population
peaks and troughs in
the hare population
are mirrored by similar
peaks and troughs in
the lynx population a
few years later
|--Snowshoe hare population
Lynx population
number of furs / thousands
1845 1855 1865 1875 1885 1895 1905 1915 1925 1935 1945
year
Figure 3 The predator-prey relationship illustrated by the number of snowshoe hare and lynx trapped for
the Hudson Bay Company in Canada between 1845 and 1940
Summary questions
1 Describe what would happen to the numbers of a
predator population if a fatal disease spread amongst
its only prey.
(1 mark)
2 Suggest two reasons why the populations of an
interlinked predator and prey population don't
produce an identical graph to the one shown
in Figure 2.
(4 marks)
3 In a controlled environment, an experiment was
carried out to study the predator-prey relationship
between the unicellular organisms Didinium and
Paramecium. A suitable Paramecium population
prey was established before a small population of
Didinium was added. Sketch and annotate a graph to
show how the populations of these organisms may
vary over time. A constant supply of nutrient material
was provided for the Paramecium. (4 marks)
636
24.3 Predator-prey relationships
Specification reference: 6.3.2
In the previous topic, you learnt about the effect of competition on
population size. Another major biotic factor that has an influence on
population size is the role of predation. This is where an organism
(the predator) kills and eats another organism (the prey). For example,
tigers prey on water buffalo and deer. Predation is a type of interspecific
competition, operating between prey and predator species.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ predator-prey relationships
Predators have evolved to become highly efficient at capturing
prey, for example, through sudden bursts of speed, stealth, and fast
reactions. Likewise, prey organisms have evolved to avoid capture
through camouflage, mimicry, or defence mechanisms such as spines.
Prey organisms have had to evolve alongside their predators (and vice
versa) - if evolution had not occurred, one or both of the species may
have become extinct.
Predator-prey relationships
The sizes of the predator and prey populations are interlinked. As the
population of one organism changes, it causes a change in the size of
the other population. This results in fluctuations in the size of both
populations.
A Figure 1 This predator-prey
relationship is often exploited by organic
farmers. In a technique known as
biological pest control, farmers use the
natural predators in this case ladybirds)
to destroy pest populations (aphids) and
prevent them damaging crops without
the need to use pesticides
Predator-prey relationships can be represented on a graph (Figure 2).
In general all predator-prey relationships follow the
same pattern. The peaks and troughs in the size of the
prey population are mirrored by peaks and troughs in
the size of the predator population after a time delay.
prey
----- predators
numbers in population
Stage one - An increase in the prey population
provides more food for the predators, allowing more
to survive and reproduce. This in turn results in an
increase in the predator population.
Stage two - The increased predator population eats
more prey organisms, causing a decline in the prey
population. The death rate of the prey population is
greater than its birth rate.
time
Stage three - The reduced prey population can
no longer support the large predator population.
Figure 2 Ageneral predator-prey graph
Intraspecific competition for food increases, resulting in a decrease
in the size of the predator population.
Stage four-Reduced predator numbers result in less of the
prey population being killed. More prey organisms survive and
reproduce, increasing the prey population - the cycle begins again.
Rarely in the wild is the link between the predator and prey
population as simple as this. Other factors will also influence the
population size - for example, the availability of the food plants of the
prey or the presence of other predators. Fluctuations in numbers may
also result from seasonal changes in abiotic factors.
635
24
POPULATIONS AND SUSTAINABILITY
Study tip
Fisheries Policy in the EU. Fishing quotas provide limits on the numbers
of certain species of fish that are allowed to be caught in a particular area.
The aim is to maintain a natural population of these species that allows
the fish to reproduce sufficiently to maintain their population.
Other techniques that have been used include:
Be careful with the use of the
word 'extinct'. Extinct means no
organisms of a particular species
are found anywhere in the world.
Overfishing can result in the
removal of a particular species
from an area, but this does not
mean the species is extinct.
The use of nets with different mesh sizes. For example, mesh sizes
can be made sufficiently large enough that immature fish can escape.
Only mature fish are caught, thus allowing breeding to continue.
Allowing commercial and recreational fishing only at certain times
of the year. This protects the breeding season of some fish species
and allows the fish levels to increase back to a sustainable level. For
example fisherman are only allowed to catch red snapper in the
Gulf of Mexico between May and July.
The introduction of fish farming to maintain the supply of protein
food, whilst preventing the loss of wild species. For example,
tilapia are among the easiest and most profitable fish to farm due
to their diet, tolerance of high stocking densities, and rapid growth.
In some regions, the fish are placed in rice fields at planting time
where they grow to edible size when the rice is ready for harvest.
Overfishing of North Sea cod po
1 State the year the population of cod was at its highest
2 Suggest why the population of North Sea cod has fallen.
As a result of increasing boat numbers and
improvements in technology, ever larger numbers of fish
have been removed from the sea. In recent years, the
number of cod caught in the North Sea has declined as
the cod population has fallen.
As a result of the near collapse of some fish populations,
the European Union introduced fishing quotas to
conserve fish stocks.
3
Explain how fishing quotas conserve fish stocks.
north sea cod/1000s of tonnes
of spawning stock
These regulations also placed limits on the mesh size of the
nets. By increasing the size of the holes in nets, only mature,
full-sized fish can be caught. Immature fish can escape.
1963 1966 1969 1972 1975 1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002
year
4 Suggest how increasing mesh size allows the fish
population to recover.
5 Evaluate how society uses data on fish populations
to inform decisions.
A Figure 6 The decline of North Sea cod stocks since 1963
Summary questions
1 State what is meant by a sustainable resource.
(1 mark)
2 Suggest two reasons why producing resources in a sustainable
way is important.
(2 marks)
3 State and explain two ways that large-scale timber production
can be managed sustainably.
(2 marks)
4 Explain how coppicing is used to produce a sustainable supply
of timber.
(4 marks)
641
