23.4 Succession
Specification reference: 6.3.1
As you have learnt, ecosystems are dynamic - they are constantly
changing. One process by which ecosystems change over time is called
succession. Have you noticed how the types of plants present change
as you move inland from a beach? In the sand very few species exist -
the further you move away from the sea, the more biodiverse the
ecosystem becomes. This is an example of succession.
Succession occurs as a result of changes to the environment (the abiotic
factors), causing the plant and animal species present to change.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
the process of primary
succession in the development
of an ecosystem.
There are two types of succession:
1 Primary succession - this occurs on an area of land that has been
newly formed or exposed such as bare rock. There is no soil or
organic material present to begin with.
2 Secondary succession - this occurs on areas of land where soil is
present, but it contains no plant or animal species. An example
would be the bare earth that remains after a forest fire.
Although much of the natural landscape has taken hundreds of years
to reach its existing form, primary succession is still taking place.
Primary succession occurs when:
volcanoes erupt, depositing lava - when lava cools and solidifies
igneous rock is created
sand is blown by the wind or deposited by the sea to create new
sand dunes
silt and mud are deposited at river estuaries
• glaciers retreat depositing rubble and exposing rock.
Stages of succession
Succession takes place in a number of steps, each one known as a
seral stage (or sere). At each seral stage key species can be identified
that change the abiotic factors, especially the soil, to make it more
suitable for the subsequent existence of other species.
The main seral stages are pioneer community, intermediate
community, and climax community, these are summarised in Figure 1.
hostile conditions, low species
diversity, and instability
less hostile conditions, high species
diversity, and stability
recolonisation
barren
land
pioneer
community
colonisers
e.g., lichen
secondary
colonisers
e.g., mosses
intermediate community
tertiary
colonisers
e.g., grasses
scrubland
e.g., shrubs
small trees
climax
community
dominant
species e.g.
woodland
key
primary succession (slow process)
secondary succession (rapid process)
land altered, e.g.
due to fire, disease,
grazing, agriculture
Figure 1 Summary of the main seral stages
619
23
23.4 Succession
Pioneer community
Primary succession begins by the colonisation of an inhospitable
environment, by organisms known as pioneer species (or pioneer
colonisers). This represents the first seral stage. These species arrive
as spores or seeds carried by the wind from nearby land masses or
sometimes by the droppings of birds or animals passing through.
Examples of pioneer species include algae and lichen.
Pioneer species have a number of adaptations that enable them to
colonise this bare environment, including:
Figure 2 Lichens are an example of a
pioneer species. A lichen is not a single
organism - it is a stable symbiotic (and
mutualistic) association between a
fungus and algae and/or cyanobacteria.
They are often the first organisms to
colonise bare rock. They are able to
survive without soil, taking up rainwater
and mineral salts through the whole of
their body surface
the ability to produce large quantities of seeds or spores, which are
blown by the wind and deposited on the 'new land'
seeds that germinate rapidly
the ability to photosynthesise to produce their own energy - light,
rainfall, and air (and so carbon dioxide) are often the only abiotic
factors present
tolerance to extreme environments
the ability to fix nitrogen from the atmosphere, so adding to the
mineral content of the soil.
Intermediate community
Over time weathering of the bare rock produces particles that form the
basis of a soil. On its own this cannot support other species. However,
when organisms of the pioneer species die and decompose small
organic products are released into the soil. This organic component
of soil is known as humus. The soil becomes able to support the
growth of new species of plant, known as secondary colonisers, as it
contains minerals including nitrates and has an ability to retain some
water. These secondary colonisers arrive as spores or seeds, Mosses are
an example of a secondary coloniser species. In some cases, pioneer
species also provide a food source for consumers, so some animal
species will start to colonise the area.
As the environmental conditions continue to improve, new species
of plant arrive such as ferns. These are known as tertiary colonisers.
These plants have a waxy cuticle that protects them from water loss.
These species can survive in conditions without an abundance of
water - however, they need to obtain most of their water and mineral
salts from the soil.
At each stage the rock continues to be eroded and the mass of organic
matter increases. When organisms decompose they contribute to a
deeper, more nutrient-rich soil, which retains more water. This makes
the abiotic conditions more favourable initially for small flowering
plants such as grasses, later shrubs, then finally small trees.
This period of succession is known as the intermediate community
and in many cases multiple seral stages evolve during this period until
climax conditions are attained.
620
ECOSYSTEMS
23.1 Ecosystems
Specification reference: 6.3.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ ecosystems and the
influence of biotic and abiotic
factors.
Ecology is the name given to the study of the relationships between
organisms and their environment. It is essential that scientists study
the natural world and the vast variety of life that exists, to help us
understand the interdependence of living organisms and to help
ensure the survival of as much of Earth's biodiversity as possible.
Defining ecosystems
An ecosystem is made up of all the living organisms that interact
with one another in a defined area, and also the physical factors
present in that region. Ecosystems can vary dramatically in size - from
a tiny bacterial colony to the entire biosphere of Earth.
Synoptic link
Look back at Chapter 11,
Biodiversity to remind yourself
of the importance of maintaining
biodiversity
The boundaries of a particular ecosystem being studied are defined
by the person or team carrying out the study. For example, individual
habitats may be studied such as a rock pool or a large oak tree, or
small areas of land such as a playing field or a particular stretch of
a river.
Factors that affect ecosystems
All ecosystems are dynamic, meaning that they are constantly
changing. This is a result of the living organisms present and the
environmental conditions.
A large number of factors affect an ecosystem. The factors can be
divided into two groups:
A Figure 1 A biome is a large naturally
occurring community of flora (plants)
and fauna (animals) occupying a major
habitat such as a rainforest
biotic factors - the living factors. For example, in a forest
ecosystem, the presence of shrews and hedgehogs are biotic
factors, as is the size of their populations - the competition
between these two animal populations for a food source
(e.g., insects) is also a biotic factor.
abiotic factors – the non-living or physical factors. Within the
forest ecosystem, abiotic factors include the amount of rainfall
received and the yearly temperature range of the ecosystem.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
competition in Chapter 24,
Populations and sustainability.
Biotic factors
Biotic factors often refer to the interactions between organisms
that are living, or have once lived. These interactions often involve
competition, either within a population or between different
populations. Examples of things for which animals compete include
food, space (territory), and breeding partners.
606
23
23.4 Succession
Conservation
Deflected succession is an important conservation technique. To ensure
the survival of certain species, it is important to preserve their habitat in
its current form. This may require ecological land management to prevent
further succession from occurring. An example of this is at the National
Trust's Studland Heath nature reserve in Dorset, England.
Studland Heath is home to a number of British reptiles, including the UK's
rarest reptile, the smooth snake. This region is heathland - if succession
were allowed to occur, woodland would develop as the climax community.
Other animal species would then inhabit the area, ultimately leading to the
replacement of the smooth snake by other animal species. This would risk the
elimination of this reptile species from the UK. So the heathland is managed
by the National Trust to ensure that the precious ecosystem is preserved.
A range of conservation techniques are being used:
A Figure 5 Britain's rarest native
reptile, the smooth snake
Physical removal of established bracken, and saplings such as birch and pine.
Gorse, which is a legume, adds to the nutrient value of the soil. Heathlands
are traditionally nutrient-poor areas of land, and so areas of gorse are also
removed through physical means (cutting, crushing, and controlled burning).
These techniques are used to restore the heathland to its former state.
Mimicking the controlled grazing to limit the spread of bracken, gorse, and
tree saplings. Livestock crush and nibble new growth, therefore limiting
the spread of these species. This technique is used to maintain the
heathland in its current state.
Through using a combination of these techniques, low nutrient levels are
maintained in the soil. This produces a varied vegetation structure, thus
supporting a biodiverse heathland community.
Synoptic link
Look back at 11.8, Methods of
maintaining biodiversity, to remind
yourself of the various techniques
scientists use to maintain
biodiversity
A herd of Red Devon cows are used to graze Studland Heath.
Explain their role in maintaining the structure of the heathland.
Succession on a sand dune
One of the few examples where all the stages of
succession can often be seen clearly in one place is when
a series of sand dunes form on a beach. The youngest
dunes will be found closest to the shore and the
oldest furthest away. Figure 6 shows a simplified version
of what occurs:
forest, e.g., large oak trees
shrubs, e.g., heather,
bracken, and gorse
dune grass,
e.g. marram
bare sand
second dune
hind dune
fore dune
dry beach
wet beach
Figure 6 Simplified diagram of
succession
622
23.2 Biomass transfer through
an ecosystem
Specification reference: 6.3.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ biomass transfers through
ecosystems.
All organisms found within an ecosystem require a source of energy
to perform the functions needed to survive. Ultimately, the Sun is the
source of energy for almost all ecosystems on Earth. Through the process
of photosynthesis, the Sun's light energy is converted into chemical
energy in plants and other photosynthetic organisms. This chemical
energy is then transferred to other non-photosynthetic organisms as food.
sparrowhawk
owl
Synoptic link
badger
shrew
blue tit
You learnt about photosynthesis
in Chapter 17, Energy for biological
processes.
caterpillar
ladybird
blackbird
* aphid
oak leaves
dead oak leaves
nettle leaves
dead nettle leaves
earthworm
Figure 1 Part of a woodland food web. The arrows on the diagram show the
direction of energy flow.
Trophic levels
You should be familiar with food chains and food webs (systems of
interlinked food chains). These are diagrams that scientists use to show
the transfer of biomass (mass of living material), and therefore energy,
through the organisms in an ecosystem. Each stage in the chain is
tertiary consumers known as a trophic level.
secondary
consumers
The first trophic level is always a producer - an organism that converts
light energy into chemical energy by the process of photosynthesis. The
subsequent trophic levels are all consumers - organisms that obtain
their energy by feeding on other organisms. The second trophic level is
occupied by a primary consumer- an animal that eats a producer.
primary consumers
producers
Figure 2 Food chains can be
presented diagrammatically as a
pyramid of numbers
The following trophic levels are labelled successively - secondary
consumer (an animal that eats a primary consumer), tertiary consumer
(an animal that eats a secondary consumer), and a quaternary
consumer (an animal that eats a tertiary consumer). Food chains rarely
have more trophic levels than this as there is not sufficient biomass
and stored energy left to support any further organisms.
608
23
ECOSYSTEMS
Abiotic factors
Light
Most plants are directly affected by light availability as light is required
for photosynthesis. In general the greater the availability of light, the
greater the success of a plant species.
Plants develop strategies to cope with different light intensities. For
example, in areas of low light they may have larger leaves. They
may also develop photosynthetic pigments that require less light, or
reproductive systems that operate only when light availability is at an
optimum.
Figure 2 Bromeliads, mosses, and
small trees growing on the upper branches
of a large tree in the cloud forest in Ecuador.
This strategy allows small plants to receive
sufficient light for photosynthesis
Temperature
The greatest effect of temperature is on the enzymes controlling
metabolic reactions. Plants will develop more rapidly in warmer
temperatures, as will ectothermic animals. (Endothermic animals
control their internal temperature, and so are less affected by the
external environment.) Changes in the temperature of an ecosystem,
for example, due to the changing seasons, can trigger migration in
some animal species, and hibernation in others. In plant species it can
trigger leaf-fall, dormancy, and flowering.
Synoptic link
You learnt about xerophytes in
Topic 9.5, Plant adaptations to
water availability.
Water availability
In most plant and animal populations, a lack of water leads to water
stress, which, if severe, will lead to death.
A lack of water will cause most plants to wilt, as water is required to
keep cells turgid and so keep the plant upright. It is also required for
photosynthesis. Cacti are an example of xerophytes, plants that have
developed successful strategies to cope with water stress.
Oxygen availability
In aquatic ecosystems, it is beneficial to have fast-flowing cold water as
it contains high concentrations of oxygen. If water becomes too warm,
or the flow rate too slow, the resulting drop in oxygen concentration
can lead to the suffocation of aquatic organisms.
A Figure 3 The scimitar Oryx
(Oryx dammah) has adapted to survive
for 9-10 months without water. Their
kidneys are specially adapted to
produce the barest minimum of urine.
They also sweat very little and so lose
hardly any of their overall water intake
In waterlogged soil, the air spaces between the soil particles are filled
with water. This reduces the oxygen available for plants.
Summary questions
Edaphic (soil) factors
Different soil types have different particle sizes. This has an effect on
the organisms that are able to survive in them. There are three main
soil types:
1 Explain what is meant by the
term 'dynamic ecosystem'.
To which ecosystems does the
term apply? (2 marks)
2 State two biotic and two
abiotic factors in a pond
ecosystem. (4 marks)
clay - this has fine particles, is easily waterlogged, and forms
clumps when wet
loam - this has different-sized particles, it retains water but does
not become waterlogged
sandy - this has coarse, well-separated particles that allow free
draining – sandy soil does not retain water and is easily eroded.
3 Explain why abiotic factors often
have a greater effect on plant
species than on animal species
in an ecosystem. (4 marks)
607
3
ECOSYSTEMS
At each seral stage different plant and animal species are better
adapted to the current conditions in the ecosystem. These organisms
outcompete many of the species that were previously present and
become the dominant species. These are the most abundant species
(by mass) present in the ecosystem at a given time.
Climax community
The final seral stage is called the climax community. The community
is then in a stable state – it will show very little change over time. There
are normally a few dominant plant and animal species. Which species
make up the climax community depends on the climate. For example,
in a temperate climate where the temperatures are mild and there is
plenty of water, large trees will normally form the climax community.
By comparison in a sub-arctic climate, herbs or shrubs make up the
climax community as temperature and water availability are low.
Although biodiversity generally increases as succession takes place, the
climax community is often not the most biodiverse. Biodiversity tends
to reach a peak in mid-succession. It then tends to decrease due to the
dominant species out-competing pioneer and other species, resulting
in their elimination. The more successful the dominant species, the
less the biodiversity in a given ecosystem.
Figure 3 Oak woodland is a common
climax community in the UK
Animal succession
Alongside the succession of plant species, animal species undergo
similar progression. Primary consumers such as insects and worms are
first to colonise an area as they consume and shelter in the mosses and
lichens present. They must move in from neighbouring areas so animal
succession is usually much slower than plant succession, especially if the
'new land' is geographically isolated, for example, a new volcanic island.
Secondary consumers will arrive once a suitable food source has
been established and the existing plant cover will provide them with
suitable habitats. Again these species must move in from neighbouring
areas. Eventually larger organisms such as mammals and reptiles will
colonise the area when the biotic conditions are favourable.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the importance of
maintaining biodiversity and the
techniques involved in Topic 11.7,
Reasons for maintaining biodiversity
and Topic 11.8, Methods of
maintaining biodiversity.
Deflected succession
Human activities can halt the natural flow of succession and prevent
the ecosystem from reaching a climax community. When succession
is stopped artificially, the final stage that is formed is known as a
plagioclimax. Agriculture is one of the main reasons deflected
succession occurs. For example:
grazing and trampling of vegetation by domesticated animals - this
results in large areas remaining as grassland
removing existing vegetation (such as shrub land) to plant crops -
the crop becomes the final community
burning as a means of forest clearance - this often leads to an
increase in biodiversity as it provides space and nutrient-rich ash
for other species to grow, such as shrubs.
Figure 4 Mowing your garden
prevents succession occurring. The
growing shoots of woody plants are
cut off by the lawnmower, so larger
plants cannot establish themselves.
A grassland plagioclimax is formed
621
ECOSYSTEMS
combustion
Carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere and
dissolved in the seas
and oceans provides
the major source
of inorganic carbon
for plants.
fossil
fuels
photosynthesis
respiration
feeding
carbon-containing
compounds in
producers
Carbon dioxide is converted into small
carbon-containing organic molecules by
photosynthesis in plants and other photosynthetic
organisms. This carbon is then used in the
production of macromolecules such as
carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids in producers.
carbon-containing
compounds in
consumers
Carbon macromolecules are passed from
producers into primary consumers when
producers are eaten. They are subsequently
passed up the food chain when a consumer itself
is consumed.
death
decomposition
prevented
decomposition
carbon-containing
compounds in
decomposers
When living organisms die, the carbon compounds in their bodies are released
through decomposition. The carbon is released into the atmosphere as carbon
dioxide when the decomposers respire.
If dead organic matter accumulates in areas where decomposers are not
present, such as the bottom of the ocean or in bogs, the carbon they contain
may become 'trapped'. Over millions of years these remains form fossil fuels.
key
living component
non-living component
A Figure 6 The carbon cycle
Fluctuations in atmospheric carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide levels fluctuate throughout the day. Photosynthesis
only takes place in the light, and so during the day photosynthesis
removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Respiration, however,
is carried out by all living organisms throughout the day and night,
releasing carbon dioxide at a relatively constant rate into the
atmosphere. Therefore, atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are higher
at night than during the day.
Localised carbon dioxide levels also fluctuate seasonally. Carbon
dioxide levels are lower on a summer's day than a winter's day, as
photosynthesis rates are higher.
Figure 7 This is limestone.
Although the bodies of marine animals
decompose quickly, their shells and
bones sink to the ocean floor. Over
millions of years these are turned
into carbon-containing sedimentary
rock such as limestone and chalk.
Eventually this carbon is returned to the
atmosphere as the rock is weathered
617
3
ECOSYSTEMS
Efficiency at consumer levels
Consumers at each trophic level convert at most 10% of the biomass
in their food to their own organic tissue. This is because:
not all of the biomass of an organism is eaten, for example, plant
roots or animal bones may not be consumed
some energy is transferred to the environment as metabolic heat,
as a result of movement and respiration
some parts of an organism are eaten but are indigestible - these
parts (and their energy content) are egested as faeces
some energy is lost from the animal in excretory materials such
as urine.
Only around 0.001% of the total energy originally present in the incident
sunlight is finally embodied as biomass in a tertiary consumer.
You can use the following formula to calculate the efficiency of
the energy transfer (approximately equivalent to biomass transfer)
between each trophic level of a food chain:
Ecological
efficiency
energy or biomass available after the transfer
- x 100
energy or biomass available before the transfer
decomposers and detritivores
(feeding on faeces, urine, and dead organisms)
producers
sun
1-3%
primary
secondary
tertiary
5-10% consumers 15-20% consumers 15-20% consumers
human
quaternary: 50 kJ
consumers m-2year!
energy lost as
energy lost as heat during respiration
reflected light
Figure 5 This diagram shows the energy flow through different levels of a food
chain. The figures stated for percentage energy transfer are approximate - energy
transfers vary considerably between different plants, animals, and ecosystems
tertiary _ trout
consumers 250 kJ m-2year!
smelt
secondary
consumers 1250 kJ m-2year
O Worked example: Calculating ecological efficiency
Look at Figure 6. This diagram shows the energy available in a
food chain in Cayuga Lake.
small aquatic animals
primary
consumers
6300 kJ m-2yearl
algae
producers
42 000 kJ m 2yearl
Calculate the ecological efficiency of the energy transfer between
smelt and trout.
Ecological energy or biomass available after the transfer
- X 100
efficiency energy or biomass available before the transfer
= 2500 x 100 = 20%
A Figure 6 This diagram shows the
energy available at each trophic level
in a food chain found in Cayuga Lake,
New York State, USA
611
23
23.2 Biomass transfer through an ecosystem
Study tip
Remember that energy cannot be
created or destroyed. However, it
can be transferred, including to less
useful forms such as heat, which is
dissipated to the environment. This
energy cannot be used to create
biomass, and is therefore not
available to the next trophic level.
3) Worked example: Efficiency of biomass transfer
A region of grassland has a net production of 40gm 2 year!. A
goat grazes an area of 20m x 20 m of this grassland. Assume that
the goat consumes all of the biomass in this area.
1
Calculate the total biomass consumed by the goat each year:
Biomass consumed = mass (per metre squared per year)
x area of land
= 40 x (20 x 20)
= 16 000 g
= 16 kg
The mass of the goat increases in this time by 2.4kg. Calculate
the efficiency of biomass transfer between the grass and the
goat.
biomass available after transfer
Efficiency of transfer =
x 100
biomass available before transfer
- 2.4 = 15%
16
2
Figure 7 Intensively farmed
animals are kept in a strictly-controlled
environment. The conditions are chosen
to ensure as much energy from their
food as possible is turned into biomass.
For example, small heated cages reduce
energy loss through movement and
maintaining body temperature
Human activities can manipulate biomass
through ecosystems
Human civilisation depends on agriculture. Agriculture involves
manipulating the environment to favour plant species that we can
eat (crops) and to rear animals for food or their produce. Plants and
animals are provided with the abiotic conditions they need to thrive
such as adequate watering and warmth (e.g., greenhouse use, stabling
of animals). Competition from other species is removed (e.g., the use of
chemicals such as pesticides) as well as the threat of predators (e.g., by
creating barriers such as fences to exclude wild herbivores or predators).
Summary questions
1 Describe how the
biomass of a trophic level is
measured. (3 marks)
In a natural ecosystem, humans would occupy the second, third or
even fourth trophic level. As you have learnt, at each trophic level
there are considerable energy losses, therefore only a tiny proportion
of the energy available at the start of the food chain is turned into
biomass for consumption at these third and fourth levels.
2 Explain how human activities
can manipulate the transfer
of biomass through
ecosystems. (2 marks)
3 Using Figure 6, calculate
the ecological efficiency of
energy transfer between
algae and small aquatic
animals.
(2 marks)
Agriculture creates very simple food chains. In farming animals or
animal produce for human consumption, only three trophic levels
are present - producers (animal feed), primary consumers (livestock),
and secondary consumers (humans). In cultivating plants for human
consumption, there are just two trophic levels - producers (crops) and
primary consumers (humans). This means that the minimum energy
is lost since there are fewer trophic levels present than in the natural
ecosystem. This ensures that as much energy as possible is transferred
into biomass that can be eaten by humans.
Explain why biomass
decreases at each level in a
food chain. (4 marks)
612
23
23.3 Recycling within ecosystems
Over the past 200 years, global atmospheric carbon dioxide levels have
increased significantly. This is mainly due to:
Synoptic link
You learnt about photosynthesis
in Chapter 17, Energy for biological
processes and about respiration in
Chapter 18, Respiration.
Synoptic link
You learnt about climate change
and global warming in Topic 11.6,
Factors affecting biodiversity.
the combustion of fossil fuels - which has released carbon dioxide
back into the atmosphere from carbon that had previously been
trapped for millions of years below the Earth's surface
deforestation - which has removed significant quantities of
photosynthesising biomass from Earth. As a result, less carbon
dioxide is removed from the atmosphere. In many cases the
cleared forest is burnt, therefore releasing more carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere.
Increased levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide trap more thermal energy
(heat) in the atmosphere - it is called a greenhouse gas for this reason. Its
production through human activities is contributing to global warming.
CO2 concentration / ppm
The amount of carbon dioxide dissolved in seas and oceans is affected
by the temperature of the water (the higher the temperature, the less
gas is dissolved). Therefore, global warming reduces the carbon bank
in the oceans and releases more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere -
further contributing to the process in a positive feedback loop.
mm
1960 1970 1980 1990
year
Figure 8 Atmospheric levels of
carbon dioxide across a 30-year period
measured at Mauna Loa, a volcanic
mountain in Hawaii. The increase is a
result of human activities - primarily
burning fossil fuels, and through
changed land usage
Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels have varied significantly over
million-year timescales. To gain information about how the atmosphere
has changed over time, samples are taken from deep within a glacier.
For example, at a depth of 3.6 km in the Antarctic glacier the ice is
420000 years old. When the ice formed air bubbles were trapped
within the ice - these bubbles reflect the composition of the atmosphere
at this point in time. Analysis of the gases present within these
bubbles therefore reveals the composition of the atmosphere at this
point in history. The graphs in Figure 9 show the variations in carbon
dioxide levels which have occurred over time. The temperature of the
atmosphere is directly related to the level of carbon dioxide present.
0
2300+
50 100 150 200
Summary questions
250
Carbon dioxide concentration / ppm
1 State the main differences between a decomposer and
a detritivore.
(2 marks)
2 State and explain three ways in which atmospheric
carbon dioxide levels increase.
(3 marks)
3 Describe what is meant by saprobiotic nutrition.
(2 marks)
temperature change /°C
Explain how the scientific community have produced
evidence that atmospheric carbon dioxide levels have
varied naturally over time.
(2 marks)
5 Explain the role of microorganisms, giving named examples
where possible, in the recycling of nitrogen in
an ecosystem.
(8 marks)
0 50 100 150 200
age/ thousands of years
Figure 9 Comparison of changes
in atmospheric carbon dioxide (from
analysis of bubbles in glacial ice) and
temperature changes from oxygen
isotope studies)
618
23
23.2 Biomass transfer through an ecosystem
transferred. The efficiency with which biomass or energy is transferred
from one trophic level to the next is called the ecological efficiency.
The amount of biomass or energy converted to new biomass by each
trophic level in a food chain can be represented by a pyramid of
energy (Figure 4).
Efficiency at producer level
Producers only convert 1-3% of the sunlight (solar or light energy)
they receive into chemical energy and hence biomass. This is because:
not all of the solar energy available is used for photosynthesis –
approximately 90% is reflected, some is transmitted through the
leaf, and some is of unusable wavelength
other factors may limit photosynthesis, such as water availability
. a proportion of the energy is 'lost', as it is used for photosynthetic
reactions.
The total solar energy that plants convert to organic matter is called
the gross production. However, plants use 20-50% of this energy in
respiration. The remaining energy is converted into biomass. This is
the energy available to the next trophic level and is known as the net
production.
The energy available to the next trophic level can be calculated using
the following formula:
Net production = gross production - respiratory losses
Note that this calculation can be applied equally to the biomass or
energy production within an organism. The generation of biomass in
a producer is referred to as primary production - in a consumer, it is
known as secondary production.
e Worked example 1: Calculating net
production (biomass)
A group of scientists measured the
gross production of a grassland area as
60gm 2 year-1. If the respiration loss was
20gm 2 year!, calculate the annual net
production of this area of grassland.
Worked example 2: Calculating net
production (energy)
Sheep in a grassland digest and absorb 15 000
kJ m 2 yr-) from the biomass they take in. Of
this, 8000 kJm-yr- is used in respiration.
How much energy is available to humans, the
next organism in the food chain?
Net production = gross production -
respiratory losses
= 15000 - 8000
= 7000 kJ m-yr-1
Net production = gross production -
respiratory losses
= 60 - 20
= 40 gm 2 year!
This is an example of primary production.
This is an example of secondary production.
610
23
23.3 Recycling within ecosystems
Nitrification is an oxidation reaction, and so only occurs in well-
aerated soil. It takes place in two steps:
1 Nitrifying bacteria (such as Nitrosomonas) oxidise ammonium
compounds into nitrites (NO,-).
2 Nitrobacter (another genus of nitrifying bacteria) oxidise nitrites into
nitrates (NO,).
Nitrate ions are highly soluble, and are therefore the form in which
most nitrogen enters a plant.
A Figure 4 Coloured transmission
electron micrograph of Nitrobacter sp.
They oxidise nitrogen-containing
molecules for energy, converting nitrites
into nitrates. Magnification 6000
Denitrification
In the absence of oxygen, for example, in waterlogged soils,
denitrifying bacteria convert nitrates in the soil back to nitrogen gas.
This process is known as denitrification - it only happens under
anaerobic conditions. The bacteria use the nitrates as a source of
energy for respiration and nitrogen gas is released.
Ammonification
Ammonification is the name given to the process by which
decomposers convert nitrogen-containing molecules in dead
organisms, faeces, and urine into ammonium compounds.
Study tip
Nitrogen cycle
The processes of nitrogen fixation, nitrification, denitrification, and
ammonification all form part of the nitrogen cycle. Their place in the
cycle can be seen in Figure 5.
You must learn the names of the
bacteria involved in the recycling of
nitrogen. Make sure you are clear
on their role in nitrogen fixation,
nitrification, denitrification, and
ammonification.
nitrogen gas in
nitrogen fixation by living
nitrogen fixation by
the atmosphere
non-living processes
organisms
denitrification e.g.
e.g., lightning and
by Pseudomonas
uptake and
the Haber process
denitrificans
assimilation
nitrates
by plants
plant
animal
NOG
(protein
protein
nitrification
nitrogen in the food
e.g., by nitrifying chain death and
mutualistic free-living
bacteria such as decomposition
nitrogen-fixing nitrogen-fixing
Nitrobacter
bacteria in root bacteria in the soil,
nodules, e.g. e.g., Azotobacter
Rhizobium
(nitrites
ammonification (by
NO,
decomposers - mainly
nitrification
bacteria and fungi)
e.g., by nitrifying
bacteria such as
Nitrosomonas
ammonia
Figure 5 The nitrogen cycle. This
shows how nitrogen is converted
into a useable form and then passed
on between organisms and the
environment. Artificial processes, such
as the Haber process used to make
ammonia for fertiliser, have an effect on
this natural cycle
NH3
Recycling carbon
Carbon is a component of all the major organic molecules present
in living organisms such as fats, carbohydrates, and proteins. The
main source of carbon for land-living organisms is the atmosphere.
Although carbon dioxide (CO) only makes up 0.04% of the
atmosphere, there is a constant cycling of carbon between the
atmosphere, the land, and living organisms. Figure 6 summarises the
key points of the carbon cycle.
616
23
ECOSYSTEMS
Study tip
Nitrogen is abundant in the atmosphere, 78% of air is nitrogen gas
(N,). However, in this form nitrogen cannot be taken up by plants.
To be used by living organisms, nitrogen needs to be combined with
other elements such as oxygen or hydrogen. Bacteria play a very
important role in converting nitrogen into a form useable by plants.
Without bacteria, nitrogen would quickly become a limiting factor in
ecosystems.
Take care to use the correct
terminology when referring to
the various nitrogen compounds
involved in the nitrogen cycle.
Nitrogen (N, ) is present in the
atmosphere as a gas, but cannot
be used directly by plants,
Nitrogen fixation
Nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as Azotobacter and Rhizobium contain
the enzyme nitrogenase, which combines atmospheric nitrogen (N)
with hydrogen (H,) to produce ammonia (NH) - a form of nitrogen
that can be absorbed and used by plants. This process is known as
nitrogen fixation.
Ammonia (NH2), or ammonium
ions (NH,+), are produced by
nitrogen-fixing bacteria and by
decomposers.
Azotobacter is an example of a free-living soil bacterium. However,
many nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as Rhizobium live inside root
nodules. These are growths on the roots of leguminous plants such
as peas, beans, and clover. The bacteria have a symbiotic mutualistic
relationship with the plant, as both organisms benefit:
Nitrites (NO,-) are formed by
nitrifying bacteria from ammonia.
These cannot be absorbed by
plants.
Nitrates (NO, ) are produced from
nitrites by other nitrifying bacteria.
Plants are able to absorb nitrates.
the plant gains amino acids from Rhizobium, which are produced
by fixing nitrogen gas in the air into ammonia in the bacteria
the bacteria gain carbohydrates produced by the plant during
photosynthesis, which they use as an energy source.
Other bacteria then convert the ammonia that is produced by nitrogen
fixation into other organic compounds that can be absorbed by plants.
Any reference to ammonia, nitrates,
or nitrites should not be written
as 'nitrogen' - rather, use the term
'nitrogen-containing molecules'.
Reward and punishment
Recent work suggests that legumes 'select' the Rhizobium colonies
which provide them with the most nitrates. Careful measurements show
that the plants reward the nodules which make lots of nitrates with
extra carbohydrates - but the punishment for nodules containing
less-productive bacteria is swift and unforgiving. The plant cuts off the
supply of carbohydrates and starves the nodule to death. This is a form of
natural selection which maximises the benefit to the plant and to those
bacteria which deliver the goods.
A Figure 3 Pink nodules of the
nitrogen-fixing bacteria Rhizobium
leguminosarum on the roots of a pea
plant. The nodules are the sites where
the bacteria fix atmospheric nitrogen,
approx x1.5 magnification
Discuss the nitrogen-fixation/carbon-fixation mutualism of legumes and
Rhizobium, including the pattern of the relationship and its importance to
living organisms.
Nitrification
Nitrification is the process by which ammonium compounds in the
soil are converted into nitrogen-containing molecules that can be
used by plants. Free-living bacteria in the soil called nitrifying bacteria
are involved.
615
3
ECOSYSTEMS
Decomposers are also important components of food webs - they
break down dead organisms releasing nutrients back into the
ecosystem. You will learn more about decomposers in Topic 23.3,
Recycling within ecosystems.
Food chains can be presented diagrammatically as a pyramid of
numbers, with each level representing the number of organisms at each
trophic level (Figure 2). In a pyramid the producers are always placed at
the bottom of the diagram with subsequent trophic levels added above.
foxes
rabbits
Measuring biomass
Biomass is the mass of living material present in a particular place or
in particular organisms. It is an important measure in the study of food
chains and food webs as it can be equated to energy content.
grass
large fish
To calculate biomass at each trophic level, you multiply the biomass
present in each organism by the total number of organisms in that trophic
level. This information can be presented diagrammatically as a pyramid
of biomass (Figure 3). This represents the biomass present at a particular
moment in time - it does not take into account seasonal changes.
small fish
zooplankton
phytoplankton
The easiest way to measure biomass is to measure the mass of fresh
material present. However, water content must be discounted and the
presence of varying amounts of water in different organisms makes
this technique unreliable unless very large samples are used. Scientists
therefore usually calculate the 'dry mass' of organisms present. This
is not without problems. Organisms have to be killed in order to be
dried. The organisms are placed in an oven at 80°C until all water
has evaporated - this point is indicated by at least two identical mass
readings. To minimise the destruction of organisms (particularly
animals) only a small sample is taken. However, this sample may not
be representative of the population as a whole.
A Figure 3 Pyramids of biomass are
virtually always a pyramid shape (top).
An exception is a pyramid of biomass
for a marine ecosystem (bottom).
Phytoplankton are microorganisms
that can photosynthesise. The mass of
phytoplankton at any given time is often
quite small, but they reproduce very
quickly so over a period of time there
is always more phytoplankton than
zooplankton
Biomass is measured in grams per square metre (gm-2) for areas of
land, or grams per cubic metre (gm ?) for areas of water.
Efficiency of biomass and energy transfer between
trophic levels
The biomass in each trophic level is nearly always less than the trophic
level below. This is because biomass consists of all the cells and tissues
of the organisms present, including the carbohydrates and other carbon
compounds the organisms contain. As carbon compounds are a store of
energy, biomass can be equated to energy content. When animals eat,
only a small proportion of the food they ingest is converted into new
tissue. It is only this part of the biomass (and hence energy)
which is available for the next trophic level to eat.
secondary consumer
(3000 MJ m-2 yr-)
primary consumer
(7000 MJ m-2 yr-l)
The energy available at each trophic level is measured in
kilojoules per metre squared per year (kJm-yr-'), to allow
for changes in photosynthetic production and consumer
feeding patterns throughout the year. As biomass is
transferred between trophic levels, so the energy contained is
producers
(50 000 MJ m-2 yr-l)
Figure 4 A pyramid of energy for grassland
609
23
23.5 Measuring the distribution and abundance of organisms
6 Worked example: Capture-mark-release-recapture
technique
In a random sample of a school playing field, students captured
12 snails. They marked the underside of each snail's shell with a
dot of non-toxic paint.
The students then released the snails back onto the field. A week
later, another sample of snails from the same location was taken.
This time 15 snails were collected, of which three were found to
have a paint dot.
Estimate the total snail population.
Step 1: Sum the total the number of individuals in the first
sample = 12
Step 2: Sum the total number of individuals in the second
sample = 15
Step 3: Estimate the population size by calculating the Lincoln
index:
Estimated population size =
number of individuals in first sample x
number of individuals in second sample 12 x 15
number of recaptured marked individuals 3
The estimated total snail population of the playing field is 60 snails.
2= 60
Once the abundance of all the organisms present in a habitat has
been determined, scientists will often mathematically calculate the
biodiversity present in a habitat. This can be done using Simpson's
Index of Diversity (D):
D = diversity index
N = total number of organisms in the ecosystem
Synoptic Link
n = number of individuals of each species
To remind yourself how to calculate
Simpson's Index of Diversity, look
back at Topic 11.4, Calculating
biodiversity.
N(N − 1)
In(n-1)
Simpson's Index of Diversity always results in a value between 0 and
1, where 0 represents no diversity and a value of l represents infinite
diversity. The higher the value of Simpson's Index of Diversity, the
more diverse the habitat.
626
23.3 Recycling within ecosystems
Specification reference: 6.3.1
:
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the role of decomposers in
ecosystems
the recycling of carbon and
nitrogen within ecosystems.
Energy has a linear flow through an ecosystem. It enters the
ecosystem from the Sun, and is ultimately transferred to the
atmosphere as heat. As long as the Sun continues to supply Earth with
energy, life will continue. In contrast, nutrients constantly have to
be recycled throughout ecosystems in order for plants and animals to
grow. This is because they are used up by living organisms and there is
no large external source constantly replenishing nutrients in the way
the Sun supplies energy.
Decomposition
Decomposition is a chemical process in which a compound is broken
down into smaller molecules, or its constituent elements. Often an
essential element, such as nitrogen or carbon, cannot be used directly
by an organism in the organic form it is in, in dead or waste matter.
This organic material must be processed into inorganic elements
and compounds, which are a more usable form, and returned to the
environment.
A decomposer is an organism that feeds on and breaks down
dead plant or animal matter, thus turning organic compounds into
inorganic ones nutrients) available to photosynthetic producers in the
ecosystem. Decomposers are primarily microscopic fungi and bacteria,
but also include larger fungi such as toadstools and bracket fungi.
Figure 1 Oyster mushrooms. Fungi
are the main decomposers in forests.
Only wood-decay fungi have evolved
the enzymes necessary to decompose
lignin, a chemically complex substance
found in wood
Decomposers are saprotrophs because they obtain their energy from
dead or waste organic material (saprobiotic nutrition). They digest
their food externally by secreting enzymes onto dead organisms or
organic waste matter. The enzymes break down complex organic
molecules into simpler soluble molecules - the decomposers
then absorb these molecules. Through this process, decomposers
release stored inorganic compounds and elements back into the
environment.
Detritivores are another class of organism involved in decomposition.
They help to speed up the decay process by feeding on detritus - dead
and decaying material. They break it down into smaller pieces of
organic material, which increases the surface area for the decomposers
to work on. Examples of detritivores include woodlice that break
down wood, and earthworms that help break down dead leaves.
Detritivores perform internal digestion.
A Figure 2 Maggots are an example of
a detritivore that helps to break down
animal tissue
Recycling nitrogen
Nitrogen is an essential element for making amino acids (and
consequently proteins) and nucleic acids in both plants and animals.
Animals obtain the nitrogen they need from the food they eat, but
plants have to take in nitrogen from their environment.
614
23
ECOSYSTEMS
Monitoring biomass during conservation 0
Amchitka Island
Ourchin number
I urchin biomass
Sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp) are marine
invertebrates that feed on kelp (a type of seaweed). In
regions where sea urchins are abundant, kelp forest
ecosystems can be disrupted. The urchins eat the kelps'
holdfasts, these are strong structures which anchor the
kelp to the sea bed. The remainder of the plant floats away
resulting in an ecosystem known as an 'urchin barren
ecosystem, which contains so little biomass of seaweeds
that few species are able to live in this region. The
presence or absence of kelp beds therefore has a major
influence on the structure of the marine community.
density of sea urchins/number 0.25 m2
sea urchin biomass/g 0.25 m2
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
diameter of sea urchin/mm
Shemya Island
urchin number - 400
I urchin biomass
density of sea urchins/number 0.25 m2
5
wo
sea urchin biomass/g 0.25 m2
A Figure 8 Forests of kelp are felled by sea urchins which
eat the kelp's holdfasts using their five self-sharpening teeth
1-
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
diameter of sea urchin/mm
A Figure 9
In many areas, sea otters (Enhydra lutris) feed on
urchins, keeping their levels low and therefore the kelp
forests intact. During the 19th century, this ecological
balance was destroyed when populations of sea otters
were virtually wiped out by excessive hunting for otter fur.
As a result, urchin numbers grew rapidly and kelp forests
were destroyed. This balance has since been restored by
the cessation of the hunting of sea otters, allowing them
to again control the abundance of the urchins. In turn, the
productive kelp forests have been able to redevelop.
1 State which trophic level of this marine community
sea otters belong to.
2 a State the diameter of the largest sea urchin
studied on Sheyma Island.
b State the diameter of sea urchins with the most
frequent biomass on Amchitka Island.
c Suggest with reasons which island has the
oldest sea urchins.
3 Oil spills can result in the death of sea urchins.
Explain how scientists can use the presence
of kelp biomass to determine how an area is
recovering from oil damage.
As part of a conservation management project,
scientists studied sea urchin populations around two
of the Aleutian Islands off the coast of Alaska. Data on
sea urchin size, density, and biomass were recorded per
0.25 m² from samples collected from Amchitka Island
(which has sea otters) and Sheyma Island (which has
no sea otters) The results are shown in Figure 9.
613
23
ECOSYSTEMS
to count all members of a population, or the counting process could
damage the environment. Populations are therefore estimated using
sampling techniques.
A sample, however, is never entirely representative of the organisms
present in a habitat. To increase its accuracy you should use as large a
sample size as possible. The greater the number of individuals studied,
the lower the probability that chance will influence the result. You
should also use random sampling to reduce the effects of sampling bias.
Measuring plant abundance
To measure the abundance of plants, quadrats are placed randomly
in an area. The abundance of the organisms in that area is measured
by counting the number of individual plants contained within the
quadrat. Using the following formula, the abundance can be estimated:
A Figure 1 This student is conducting
a survey using a quadrat. A quadrat is a
frame of standard size, often a square
divided into equal sections by string,
which is used to isolate an area from
which a sample is to be taken. Quadrats
are often used for measuring the
abundance of different species within a
given area
Estimated number
in population (m-2
Number of individuals in sample
Area of sample (m²)
2 Worked example: Estimating plant abundance
A sample was taken using five quadrats with a combined area
of 5 m². If the quadrats contained a total of 40 buttercup plants,
what is the estimated abundance of buttercups?
Study tip
Step 1: Identify the equation needed
Estimated number Number of individuals in sample
in population (
m2) Area of sample (m²)
Individual plants in a quadrat
can sometimes be difficult to
count so scientists also make
estimates using frequency or
percentage cover. Look back at
Topic 11.3, Sampling techniques to
remind yourself of these different
techniques.
Step 2: Substitute the values into the equation and calculate
the answer ? = 8 m-2
Meaning eight buttercups per square metre.
Measuring animal abundance
Quadrats cannot be used to measure the abundance of animals (unless
they are very slow moving, such as barnacles and mussels on a sea
shore) so the capture-mark-release-recapture technique is often used
to estimate population size.
The technique can be carried out as follows:
1 Capture as many individuals as possible in a sample area.
2 Mark or tag each individual.
3 Release the marked animals back into the sample area and allow
time for them to redistribute themselves throughout the habitat.
4 Recapture as many individuals as possible in the original sample area.
5 Record the number of marked and unmarked individuals present
in the sample. (Release all individuals back into their habitat.)
6 Use the Lincoln index to estimate the population size:
A Figure 2 The animals sampled can be
collected in a number of ways including
using pooters, sweep nets, and pitfall
traps. (Topic 11.3, Sampling techniques).
This student is collecting crawling
animals off a tree using a pooter
number of individuals in first sample x
number of individuals in second sample
Estimated population size ==
number of recaptured marked individuals
625
23
ECOSYSTEMS
@ Monitoring biodiversity in the Sonoran desert Oo
The Sonoran desert is a region of desert in the
1 Suggest how the data could have been
south-western part of the United States, including parts
collected
of Arizona and California. The environment is harsh -
2 Explain how you can tell that the figures stated
summer temperatures regularly exceed 40 °C. Rainfall is
for animal abundance were a mean of several
rare, often taking the form of intense, violent storms.
observations
A student carried out a study to test the following
3 Plot the data as a scatter diagram.
hypothesis - 'the greater the abundance of plant species in 4 Using your diagram from Q3, state the correlation
the Sonoran desert, the greater the abundance of animals'. between the variables, if any.
A selection of the data collected is shown in Table 1.
65d2
5 Using the formula p=1 --
Table 1
the Spearman's rank correlation coefficient for
Mean plant
Mean animal
abundance/50 m-2 abundance/ 50 m-2
this data.
Use the Spearman's ranked correlation
0.05
coefficient critical values in the appendix to
0.06
determine the statistical significance of the
0.20
correlation, and hence form a conclusion
0.19
from the data.
0.11
0.44
nin2_
calculate
0.92
1.19
1.44
1.45
11
12
1.78
2.00
2.06
2.33
2.78
13
14
Synoptic link
Remind yourself how to calculate
the Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient by looking back to
Topic 10.6, Representing variation
graphically.
Summary questions
Study tip
1 State the difference between the abundance and distribution
of organisms.
(1 mark)
2 Twenty woodlice were captured in a sample area and marked then
released back into the sample area. A week later, 15 woodlice were
found in the sample area, of which only two were marked.
a Suggest which piece of apparatus should be used to collect
woodlice.
(1 mark)
b Oo Use the Lincoln index to estimate the woodlouse
population.
(2 marks)
The correlation test is used to
see if two different variables are
correlated in a linear fashion in the
context of a scatter-graph. There are
several different types of statistical
test that can be used, the OCR GCE
Biology specifications will only
cover Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient. You can find a full table
of values in the appendix.
3 State and explain one advantage of the following techniques used
to measure the distribution of organisms in an ecosystem. (2 marks)
a random sampling
b non-random sampling
4 Discuss the limitations of using the capture-mark-release-
recapture technique to estimate population size.
(6 marks)
627
23
Chapter 23 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 Ecological succession describes the change in
species within a community over time.
time
agricultural land after land is
is kept in an abandoned wild
artificial seral stage grasses start to grow
from wind blown over
over time shrubs
start to colonise
the grassland
trees become
established and
climax community
develops
(i) Describe the changes in carbon content
of the components of the ecosystem
shown in the diagram. (4 marks)
(ii) Suggest how these changes would
differ if the succession started without
the presence of any soil. (4 marks)
As succession progresses the net primary
productivity changes as shown in the graph,
this is the net rate at which an ecosystem
accumulates energy.
a (i) State, giving your reasons, the type of
succession shown in the diagram.
(1 mark)
(ii) Describe the ecological role of the
different species involved in the early
stages of succession. (2 marks)
The graph shows the changing mass of species
in a standard example of succession.
net productivity per year
pine
shrubs
trees
pioneer
climax
community community
d (i) Describe the change in net primary
productivity shown in the graph.
(3 marks)
(ii) Suggest the reasons for the changes
you have described in d (ii). (3 marks)
Ecological pyramids summarise the feeding
relationships within an ecosystem in terms of
number, biomass or energy.
oak
mass of plants
trees
grasses
2
Mosses
time
b (i) State the name given to mosses
describing their role in this example
of succession.
(ii) Explain why mosses, grasses, and
shrubs all eventually decrease in
mass.
(iii) State the name given to the
community composed primarily of
Pine and Oak trees.
(1 mark)
The quantity of carbon sink changes
throughout a period of succession. The graph
summarises these changes.
a
-
carbon stores (gha-' x 10)
live
detritus
total
average
soil
3 160.00
x 140.00
T 120.00
100.00 -
80.00
60.00
40.00
20.00 -
0.00 +
0
(i) State the definition of the term
trophic level.
(1 mark)
(ii) Identify which of the lists below
represents each of the ecological
pyramids shown in the diagram.
(2 marks)
1 lettuce plant, snail, thrush,
sparrowhawk
2 tree, aphid, caterpillar, parasite
(iii) Suggest, giving your reason(s), whether
the ecological pyramids in the diagram
represent number or biomass. (2 marks)
(iv) Describe how you would represent
decomposers on pyramid A, or B.
(2 marks)
50
100
150
time (years)
200
250
300
628
23
ECOSYSTEMS
colonise the dunes, the sand disappears and the dunes
change colour - from yellow to grey.
Seeds are blown onto the dunes or washed onto the
sand by the sea. At this stage the rooting conditions
are poor due to drought, strong winds, and salty sea-
water immersion. The presence of a large number of
sea shells also makes the environment very alkaline.
As the wind blows across the dunes it moves the sand,
constantly changing the profile of the dunes and
allowing rainwater to soak through rapidly. However,
some species such as sea couch grass are able to
survive these harsh conditions.
Finally taller plants, such as sea buckthorn, or more
complex plant species like moorland heathers can grow.
Plants from earlier stages are no longer present.
When the water table reaches or nearly reaches the
surface, dune slacks can occur. Plants that are specially
adapted to be water-tolerant grow here adding to the
biodiversity of the sand dunes.
Marram grass becomes the next dominant species. As
these plants grow sand is trapped between the roots
helping to stabilise the dunes, and the formation of soil
begins. Minerals released from decaying pioneer plants
create more fertile growing conditions, and the soil
becomes less alkaline as pioneer plants grow and trap
rainwater. The grasses also reduce salt spray into the
hind dunes, and act as a partial wind barrier. Less hardy
plants can now grow - over time, these species start
to shade out the pioneers. As more species of plants
1 State what type of succession occurs on a sand
dune.
2 a Name an example of a pioneer species.
b Suggest and explain two features of the
species you named in question 2a.
3 Describe the role marram grass plays in
succession.
4 Describe how the abiotic conditions on a sand
dune change over time.
5 Explain why fewer pioneer species are present in a
climax community of trees or heathers.
Summary questions
Synoptic link
1 State the difference between a climax community and a
plagioclimax community.
(1 mark)
You learnt about the adaptations
of marram grass in Topic 9.5, Plant
adaptations to water availability
and Topic 10.7, Adaptations.
2 Describe the difference between primary and secondary
succession.
(1 mark)
3 State and explain the common developments that occur
in succession in any ecosystem.
(6 marks)
Evaluate the use of deflected succession as a conservation
technique to help maintain the population of an endangered
animal species.
(6 marks)
623
ECOSYSTEMS
23
3
a
Discuss possible reasons for the differences
in net primary production in these
ecosystems.
(4 marks)
To calculate the net primary production
figures in the table in k Jm-2 yearl, it is
necessary to measure the energy content
of the primary producers. Outline how
the energy content, in KJ, of a primary
producer such as grass can be measured in
the laboratory.
(2 marks)
The efficiency with which consumers
convert the food they eat into their
own biomass is generally low. The table
compares the energy egested, absorbed,
and respired in four types of animal.
IL
animal
Percentage of energy consumed that is:
egested absorbed respired converted
to biomass
63
3?
24
13
a Outline the factors that can affect primary
productivity.
(5 marks)
It is usually impossible to count all of the
members of a population in a particular
habitat so animal populations often have
to be estimated.
One method to estimate population size
uses the Lincoln Index.
b (i) Outline the principles that underlie
the Lincoln Index.
(3 marks)
(ii) Discuss the limitations of using
the Lincoln Index to estimate
population size.
(5 marks)
In different locations of Utah Lake in the
US, 24064 carp were captured, tagged,
and released over a 15 day period.
After the tagging was finished, another
10357 carp at random locations of the
lake were caught and the number of
tagged fish counted. Only 208 of the
recaptured carp had tags.
c Calculate, using the formula, the
estimated population number of carp
in the lake.
(2 marks)
Number marked Number marked
in second sample in first sample
Total caught in Size of whole
second sample population (N)
State, giving your reason(s), if the
estimate become more accurate if more
individuals are captured and marked.
(2 marks)
State one adjustment you would have
to make to the investigation if you were
estimating a population of snails rather
than fish.
(1 mark)
Total plant growth within an ecosystem
depends on the light intensity, temperature,
and the supply of water and inorganic
minerals to the ecosystem.
The table shows the net primary production
by plants in four different ecosystems.
grasshopper
(herbivorous insect)
perch (carnivorous
fish)
160
cow (herbivorous
mammal)
60
40
77
bobcat (carnivorous 17
mammal)
4
(i) Copy and complete the table to show
the percentage of energy consumed
that is converted into biomass in the
perch and the cow. (2 marks)
(ii) Describe and explain, using the data
from the table, how the trophic level
of a mammal affects the percentage
of its food energy that it is able to
convert to biomass. (3 marks)
(iii) Using the data from the table and
your knowledge of energy flow
through food chains, suggest which
of these four animals could be farmed
to provide the maximum amount
of food energy in kJ m-2 year-l for
humans. Explain the reason for
your choice.
(4 marks)
OCR F215 2011
Ecosystem
Net primary production
(k Jm-2 year-1)
temperate grassland | 9 240
temperate woodland | 11 340
tropical grassland 13 340
tropical rainforest 36 160
629
23.5 Measuring the distribution
and abundance of organisms
Specification reference: 6.3.1
Scientists use a number of techniques to study the distribution
and abundance of organisms within an ecosystem. This is a way of
measuring and observing the biodiversity present within an ecosystem.
These techniques can also be used to study how the organisms present
change during succession. Many of these techniques you met in
Chapter 11, Biodiversity.
be
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
how the distribution and
abundance of organisms
in an ecosystem can be
measured
the use of sampling and
recording methods to
determine the distribution
and abundance of organisms
in a variety of ecosystems.
Distribution of organisms
The distribution of organisms refers to where individual organisms are
found within an ecosystem. The distribution of organisms is usually
uneven throughout an ecosystem. Organisms are generally found
where abiotic and biotic factors favour them, therefore their survival
rate is high as all the resources they need to live are available and
predation/pressure from consumers is low.
Synoptic link
You learnt about sampling
techniques in Topic 11.2, Sampling
and Topic 11.3, Sampling
techniques. This topic reminds you
briefly of the techniques, but you
should refer to those topics also.
Measuring distribution
To measure the distribution of organisms within an ecosystem, a
line or belt transect is normally used. A line transect involves laying
a line or surveyor's tape along the ground and taking samples at
regular intervals. A belt transect provides more information - two
parallel lines are marked, and samples are taken of the area between
these specified points. Belt and line transects are forms of systematic
sampling, a type of non-random sampling.
In systematic sampling different areas within an overall habitat
are identified, which are then sampled separately. This can have
advantages over random sampling as it allows scientists to study how
the differing abiotic factors in different areas of the habitat affect the
distribution of a species. For example, systematic sampling may be
used to study how plant species change as you move inland from the
sea. This would therefore be used to study the successional changes
that take place along a series of sand dunes.
Study tip
Remember that two other types
of non-random sampling could
also be used - opportunistic and
stratified sampling. See Topic 11.2,
Sampling
Abundance of organisms
The abundance of organisms refers to the number of individuals of
a species present in an area at any given time. This number may
fluctuate daily:
Immigration and births will increase the numbers of individuals.
Emigration and deaths will decrease the number of individuals.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about how
population size changes in Topic
24.1, Population size.
Measuring abundance
A population is a group of similar organisms living in a given area
at a given time. Populations can rarely be counted accurately - for
example, some animals elude capture, it may be too time-consuming
624
