20
20.5 Evolution
sample of
original population
descendants
founding population A
founding population B
Figure 3 Diagram illustrating how small samples from a population can lead to
populations with very different, and reduced, gene pools
The Afrikaner population in South Africa is descended mainly from
a few Dutch settlers. The population today has an unusually high
frequency of the allele that causes Huntington's disease. It is thought
that just one of the original settlers carried the disease-causing allele.
The Amish people of America have descended from 200 Germans who
settled in Pennsylvania in the 18th century. They rarely marry and
have children outside their own religion and are therefore a closed
community. The Amish have unusually high frequencies of alleles that
cause the normally rare genetic disorder Ellis-van Creveld syndrome.
People with the syndrome are short, they often have polydactyly
(extra fingers or toes), abnormalities of nails and teeth, and a hole
between the two upper chambers of the heart. Ellis-van Creveld
syndrome is an example of founder effect caused by one couple,
Samuel King and his wife, who settled in the area in 1744.
A Figure 4 Close-up of a baby's hand
showing an extra finger. This condition is
called polydactylism
Evolutionary forces
The traits or characteristics of all living organisms show variation
within populations. The distribution of the different variants will take
the form of a bell-shaped curve if plotted on a graph. This is known in
statistics as a normal distribution.
Stabilising selection
Taking the birth weight of babies as an example,
babies with an average birth weight will be the
most common and therefore form the peak of the
graph. Babies with very low birth weight are more
prone to infections and very large babies result in
difficult births. Both of these extremes in weight
reduce the survival chances of babies so the
numbers of survivals of very small or very large
babies remains low forming the tails on Figure 5.
99.7%
95%
68%
w
10.0
11.0
3.5 4.5 5.4 6.3 7.3 8.2 9.1
birth weights (pounds)
A Figure 5 Birth weights of baby girls in Europe
This is natural selection, or survival of the fittest,
at work. Babies with average birth weights
are more likely to survive and reproduce than
underweight or overweight babies. It is an
540
20
20.2 Monogenic inheritance
meiosis
meiosis
parental
Haemophilia
phenotypes normal female haemophiliac male
XHXH
Xh Y
Haemophilia is an example of a sex-linked genetic disorder. Patients
parental
genotypes
with haemophilia have blood which clots extremely slowly due to
the absence of a protein blood-clotting factor in the majority of cases
this is factor VIII). As a result injury can result in prolonged bleeding
gametes X X X Y
which, if left untreated, is potentially fatal.
offspring
genotypes
o gametes
If a male inherits the recessive allele that codes for haemophilia (on their X
gametes
chromosome) they cannot have a corresponding dominant allele on their
Y chromosome, and so develop the condition. As a result the vast majority
| XHX* XHY
of haemophilia sufferers are males. Females who are heterozygous for the
haemophilia coding gene are known as carriers. They do not suffer from
XHXH XHY
the disorder, however they may pass on the allele to their children. This
can result in the birth of a son who suffers from haemophilia.
offspring 50% carrier females (XHXH)
phenotypes 50% normal males (XHY)
When showing the inheritance of a sex-linked condition the alleles
Figure 12 Inheritance of the
are shown linked to the sex chromosome they are found on. In this
haemophiliac allele from a haemophiliac example, haemophilia is linked to the X chromosome, therefore:
male
xH is used to represent the dominant 'healthy' allele.
H = allele for production of clotting protein (rapid blood clotting)
xh is used to represent the recessive allele coding
h = allele for non-production of clotting protein (slow blood clotting)
for haemophilia (through the non-production of a
parental phenotypes normal female (carrier) normal male
blood-clotting protein). This is often known as the
parental genotypes
xH xh
XHY
faulty allele.
meiosis
meiosis
Y is used to represent the Y chromosome - it has
no allele attached to it as it does not carry the gene
gametes xH xh
which produces the specific blood-clotting protein
offspring
o gametes
(Figure 12).
genotypes
gametes
If a carrier female and a normal male have children,
then in theory half of the male offspring produced
XH XH XHY
will have the disorder (Figure 13). Half of the female
offspring will be carriers. As male offspring only
xH xh
Xhy
inherit an X chromosome from their mother, sons
offspring
25% normal female (xH xH) can only inherit the condition from their mother.
phenotypes
25% normal male
(XH Y)
However, an affected male can pass on the faulty
25% normal female (carrier) (XHX")
allele to his daughters, resulting in them becoming
25% haemophiliac male (why)
carriers of the disorder (Figure 12).
A Figure 13 Inheritance of haemophilia
from a normal female (carrier)
Summary questions
XH
1 State the difference between a homozygous genotype
and a heterozygous genotype.
(1 mark)
2 What is special about the phenotypes formed as a result of
a gene which has codominant alleles?
(2 marks)
3 Using a genetic cross show the blood groups of the potential offspring of
a father with blood group AB and a mother with blood group 0. (6 marks)
4 Some individuals cannot distinguish between the colours red and green.
This form of colour blindness is a sex-linked condition, linked to the X
chromosome. The allele for red-green colour blindness is recessive to
the normal allele. Show how colour blindness can be present in the son
of two parents who do not display colour blindness. (6 marks)
528
20
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
antigens present on the surface of red blood cells. There are three
alleles of this gene:
parental
phenotypes
parental
genotypes
Group A
A 10
Group B
1310
meiosis
meiosis
IA – results in the production of antigen A
1B – results in the production of antigen B
10 – results in the production of neither antigen
IA and I are codominant whereas Tº is recessive to both of the
other alleles. Different combinations of these alleles result in the
four blood groups:
gametes
offspring
genotypes
gametes
o gametes
ABBO
IA JO
1010
Blood group A -JAIA or IAIO
Blood group B - IBIB or IBIO
Blood group AB - IA1B
Blood group 0 - 10
There are many different possible crosses. Figure 8 shows how
parents of blood group A and B can reproduce to produce children
who may display any of the four blood groups.
offspring
phenotypes
25% blood group A
25% blood group B
25% blood group AB
25% blood group 0
(A10)
(1B 10)
(1A 1B)
(1010)
A Figure 8
Determining sex
In humans and other mammals, as well as many other species, sex
is genetically determined. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes
of varying sizes and shapes. In 22 of the pairs, both members of the
pair are the same but the 23rd pair, known as the sex chromosomes,
are different. Human females have two X chromosomes, whereas
a male has an X and a Y chromosome. The X chromosome is large
and contains many genes not involved in sexual development. The Y
chromosome is very small, containing almost no genetic information,
but it does carry a gene that causes the embryo to develop as a male.
Therefore the sex of the offspring will be determined by whether the
sperm fertilising the egg contains a Y chromosome or an X.
A Figure 9 An X and Y human
chromosome viewed through a scanning
electron microscope
male
female
parental
phenotypes
parental
genotypes
XY
XX
Sex linkage
Some characteristics are determined by genes carried on the
sex chromosomes - these genes are called sex linked. As the Y
chromosome is much smaller than the X chromosome, there are a
number of genes in the X chromosome that males have only one
copy of. This means that any characteristic caused by a recessive
allele on the section of the X chromosome, which is missing in the Y
chromosome, occurs more frequently in males. This is because many
females will also have a dominant allele present in their cells.
gametes
offspring genotypes
o
gametes
Y gametes
TXX
XY
offspring phenotypes
50% male (XY)
50% female (XX)
Figure 11 Sex inheritance in humans
A Figure 10 This is a test used to determine whether a person is colour blind.
Red green colour blindness is a sex-linked disorder. It is caused by a recessive
allele carried on the X chromosome. It is therefore much more common in males
527
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
20
2 Density-independent factors affect populations of all sizes in
the same way including - climate change, natural disasters,
time →
seasonal change, and human activities (for example,
deforestation).
Large reductions in population size which last for at least one
catastrophic event
generation are called population bottlenecks (Figure 1). The
A Figure 1 A natural disaster or epidemic
gene pool, along with genetic diversity, is greatly reduced and
can drastically reduce a population. The gene
the effects will be seen in future generations. It takes thousands
pool will be greatly reduced and the remaining
of years for genetic diversity to develop in a population through individuals may not be representative of the
the slow accumulation of mutations.
original population as some rarer alleles may not
have been present in any of the survivors. The
Northern elephant seals were almost hunted to extinction in the
'founder effect' and genetic drift will influence
19th century. There were probably only about 20 seals left by
genetic variation as the population grows again
the time hunting stopped. They now have a population of about
30000 but show much less genetic diversity than southern elephant
seals that did not experience a genetic bottleneck.
Cheetahs are thought to have experienced an initial population
bottleneck about 10 000 years ago with other bottlenecks happening
more recently. The species now shows low genetic diversity. Cheetahs
face the same threats as many other African animals such as habitat
loss and poaching, but while the population sizes of other animals are
increasing thanks to the efforts of conservationists, cheetahs are not
recovering as quickly. They are, in fact, close to extinction.
The reduced genetic diversity of cheetahs means that they share around
99% of their alleles with other members of the species, more than we
share with members of our own family. Mammals usually share about
80% of their alleles with other members of a species. As a result they
are showing problems of inbreeding including reduced fertility.
A Figure 2 Cheetah mother and cubs,
Acinonyx jubatus, Masai Mara Reserve,
Kenya
Humans and chimpanzees split from a common ancestor about six
million years ago. A small group of chimpanzees are likely to show
more genetic diversity than all the humans alive today. It is believed
that humans have experienced at least one genetic bottleneck, reducing
our genetic diversity, as we have evolved into our present form.
A positive aspect of a genetic bottleneck is that a beneficial mutation
will have a much greater impact and lead to the quicker development
of a new species. This is thought to have a played a role in the
evolution of early humans.
Founder effect
Small populations can arise due to the establishment of new colonies
by a few isolated individuals, leading to the founder effect. The
founder effect is an extreme example of genetic drift.
These small populations have much smaller gene pools than the
original population and display less genetic variation. If carried to
the new population, the frequency of any alleles that were rare in
the original population will be much higher in the new, smaller
population and so they will have a much bigger impact during
natural selection.
539
20
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
example of stabilising selection because the norm or average is
selected for (positive selection) and the extremes are selected against
(negative selection). Stabilising selection therefore results in a reduction
in the frequency of alleles at the extremes, and an increase in the
frequency of 'average' alleles.
Directional selection
Directional selection occurs when there is change in the environment
and the normal (most common) phenotype is no longer the most
advantageous. Organisms which are less common and have more
extreme phenotypes are positively selected. The allele frequency then
shifts towards the extreme phenotypes and evolution occurs.
The changes seen in peppered moths during the industrial revolution
are a good example of directional selection. During this period of
time a lot of smoke was released from factories, which killed lichens
growing on barks of trees, and the soot made the bark black. Peppered
moths were originally light coloured meaning they were camouflaged
by the lichen from predation by birds. There were always a few darker
moths present, due to variation, but these were quickly eaten and the
allele frequency maintained.
When the lichens died and the trees became black the situation
was reversed. The light-coloured moths were very visible and were
eaten and the darker moths were camouflaged. Over time the allele
frequency shifted due to natural selection and the majority of the
peppered moths had the darker colour. The allele frequency had been
shifted towards an extreme (less common) phenotype.
As pollution has decreased again the allele frequency of the lighter
coloured moths has increased.
A Figure 6 Light and dark-coloured
peppered moths
Disruptive selection
In disruptive selection the extremes are selected for and the norm
selected against. The finches observed by Darwin in the Galapagos
Islands had been subjected to disruptive selection. This is opposite to
stabilising selection when the norm is positively selected.
original population
number of individuals
phenotypes (shell color)
evolved original
population population
stabilising selection directional selection diversifying selection
A Figure 7 Graphs showing the different forms of selection. The arrows indicate a
selection pressure
Figure 8 Top: lazuli bird with bright,
blue plumage, middle: lazuli bird with
intermediate plumage, and bottom:
lazuli bird with dull, brown plumage
541
20
20.5 Evolution
Although examples of disruptive selection are relatively rare, a well-
documented example involves feather colour in male lazuli buntings
(Passerina amoena), birds which are native to North America. The feather
colour of young males can range from bright blue to dull brown.
mean
NNNNN
frequency
There are limited nesting sites in their habitat
and so there is a lot of competition between
male birds to establish territories and attract
female birds. Dull, brown males are seen as
non-threatening and bright, blue males too
threatening by adult males. Both the brown
and blue birds are therefore left alone but
birds of intermediate colour are attacked by
adult birds and so fail to mate or establish
territories.
dull
bright
Figure 9 The distribution of phenotypes as a result of disruptive
selection pressures on lazuli buntings
The extremes are selected for and the
distribution of phenotypes shows two peaks
as in Figure 9.
Synoptic link
Summary questions
You learnt about natural selection in
Topic 10.4, Evidence for evolution.
1 Explain why evolution does not occur within single organisms but
groups of organisms.
(3 marks)
2 Human beings tend to reproduce with individuals that are visibly similar
to themselves. This happens because of personal choice or due to
geographical reasons. This leads to positive assortative mating.
a Explain why this might effect any conclusions drawn from the
Hardy-Weinberg equation.
(2 marks)
b Suggest what happens in negative assortative mating. (1 mark)
3 Explain why the allele frequency is changing so quickly in Figure 10.
(4 marks)
frequency of
generation
green trait
17%
25%
Figure 10 An example
of genetic drift happening
rapidly over three
3 DoOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 44% generations
Eukaryotic organisms have large quantities of non-coding DNA whereas
most prokaryotic organisms have very little.
Suggest, with reference to the different forms of reproduction in
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, why eukaryotes may have evolved to have
more non-coding DNA.
(4 marks)
542
20
20.6 Speciation and artificial selection
Offspring from this cross showing the best examples of the desired
traits are then selected to breed. This breeding of closely related
individuals is called inbreeding. The process is repeated over many
generations resulting in changes to the frequency of alleles within the
population and eventually speciation.
Brassica oleracea is a wild mustard which has been selectively bred for
many centuries producing a number of common vegetables.
Problems caused by inbreeding
Limiting the gene pool and so decreasing genetic diversity reduces the
chances of a population of inbred organisms evolving and adapting to
changes in their environment.
Many genetic disorders are caused by recessive alleles, for example,
cystic fibrosis, a condition where the digestive system and lungs
become clogged with mucus. Recessive alleles are not uncommon in
most populations but two recessive alleles are needed before they are
expressed and most individuals will be heterozygous.
Organisms that are closely related are genetically similar and are likely
to have the same recessive alleles. The breeding of closely related
organisms therefore results in offspring which have a greater chance
of being homozygous for these recessive traits and being affected by
genetic disorders. Over time this reduces the ability of these organisms
to survive and reproduce. This results in the organisms being less
biologically fit - in other words, less likely to survive and produce two
surviving offspring to replace themselves.
Pedigree dogs and the ethics of artificial selection 00
herding animals. Different traits were selected for
depending on whether they were used for hunting,
fighting, herding, or even as status symbols, and so a
range of dogs with different characteristics evolved.
Domesticated dogs are all members of the same
species, Canis familiaris. They are another, sometimes
controversial, example of how selective breeding has
created a variety of different looking individuals from
one wild species. The wild species was the grey wolf and
the process began between 18 000 and 32 000 years
ago when humans were still leading a hunter-gatherer
lifestyle.
Many of those characteristics have been exaggerated
by continued selective breeding and are most obvious
in pedigree dogs seen today. Rather than being selected
for the role they performed which was not dissimilar to
natural selection, they began to be selected for their looks
which took no account of any impact on their health.
Interbreeding with wild wolves would have been common
which can make tracing the evolution of dogs difficult.
It is thought that wolves starting 'hanging around' human
hunting parties because of the availability of scraps of
leftover food. Over time, the more social wolves would
have become integrated into the human groups and so
the process of selective breeding began. The wolves that
became integrated were eventually used to help catch
animals during the hunts or served a protective role like
modern-day guard dogs.
Dachshunds were selected for small size and short
legs so that they could follow prey such as foxes and
badgers into burrows. Great Danes were selected for large
size and strength for hunting and fighting.
Hunter-gatherers eventually started forming settled
communities and began the practice of farming. The
evolving wolves would have had new roles such as
The breeding of pedigree dogs is restricted to the
descendants of dogs that were registered by the Kennel
546
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
20
Blind mole rats live in a small area of northern Israel that
allopatric speciation
is part igneous basalt rock and part chalk bedrock. The
new
different types of soils formed above the bedrock support
→ Species
species
a different range of plants. Blind mole rats found in both
ancestral
geographic barrier
species
types of soil are sometimes only separated by a few metres
ancestral
of the loose soil. Mole rats will only interbreed with mole
species
rats living in the same type of soil. DNA analysis has
shown that the lack of gene flow between the two species
sympatric speciation
is already resulting in genetic differences even though
new
members of the different groups often come into contact
ancestral
species
with each other as there is no physical barrier. Over time species
ancestral
the genetic differences could accumulate to the point that
species
the mole rats from different soil types will no longer be able A Figure 3 Diagram showing the formation of a new
to interbreed and they will be separate species.
species both with and without a geographical barrier
Plants cross with plants of different species forming hybrids
Einkorn wheat
much more frequently than animals. The indiscriminate release
diploid
of large numbers of pollen grains by plants is one reason for this.
(14
The hybrids are reproductively isolated from each parent species
chromosomes)
but could still be present in the same habitat. The evolution of
(AA)
(BB)
modern wheat has involved at least two hybridisation events
and the formation of new species along the way.
Emmer and durum
goat
wheats
grasses
Disruptive selection, mating preferences, and other
behavioural differences can all result in individuals or small
tetraploids
(28
diploids
groups becoming reproductively isolated. They will, however,
chromosomes)
still be living in the same habitat so gene flow, even if
reduced, often interferes with the process of speciation.
(AABB)
(DD)
Reproductive barriers
bread wheats
Barriers to successful interbreeding can form within populations
before or after fertilisation has occurred. Prezygotic reproductive
hexaploids
barriers prevent fertilisation and the formation of a zygote.
(42 chromosomes)
Postzygotic reproductive barriers, often produced as a result of
hybridisation, reduce the viability or reproductive potential of
(AABBDD)
offspring.
A Figure 4 The evolution of modern wheat
including two hybridisation events which would
Artificial selection
have both led to sympatric speciation
Populations are usually polymorphic (display more than one distinct
phenotype) for most characteristics. The allele coding for the most
common, or normal, characteristic is called the wild type allele. Other
forms of that allele, resulting from mutations, are called mutants.
Artificial selection (or selective breeding) is fundamentally
the same as natural selection except for the nature of the selection
pressure applied. Instead of changes in the environment leading
to survival of the fittest, it is the selection for breeding of plants or
animals with desirable characteristics by farmers or breeders.
Farmers have been selectively breeding plants and animals since
before genes were discovered or the theory of evolution was proposed.
Individuals with the desired characteristics are selected and interbred.
545
20
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
The colour of a Labrador varies depending on which alleles are present
at each locus. The genes are not expressed independently and so this
is an example of epistasis. The gene at the E locus is epistatic to the
hypostatic gene at the B locus.
The different phenotypes and genotypes are shown in Table 3.
Table 3
Phenotype
Blocus E locus Fur Skin Overall
genotype genotype colour colour colour
BB/Be
EE/Ee
black
black
black
BB/Be
ee
yellow
black
brown
bb
EE/Ee
brown brown yellow
ee
yellow brown yellow
There are only three registered colours, black, brown (chocolate), and
yellow (golden). The yellow coat is an example of recessive epistasis
and it ranges from deep gold to pale blond.
Summary questions
1 Explain what the chi-squared (?) test is used to measure.
(3 marks)
2 Horse coat colour is an example of epistasis. Two genes are involved. The
different colours and the genotypes responsible are summarised here.
G produces a grey horse
gg E produces a black horse
gg ee produces a chestnut horse.
Explain, giving your reasons, which form of epistasis this represents.
(5 marks)
3 A biologist test crosses a plant that is heterozygous for the alleles Xx and
Yy in order to see how far apart the gene loci are on a chromosome. The
offspring of this cross contains 5.2% recombinant individuals.
a State the distance between these alleles.
(1 mark)
b Describe how the biologist could determine where a third gene with
the alleles Zz is on the chromosome relative to Xx and Yy. (4 marks)
c Suggest why this sort of investigation is best carried out with
genes that are relatively close to each other.
(2 marks)
537
20.6 Speciation and artificial
selection
Specification reference: 6.1.2
Speciation is the formation of new species through the process of
evolution. The organisms belonging to the new species will no longer be
able to interbreed to produce fertile offspring with organisms belonging
to the original species. A number of events happen leading to speciation:
Members of a population become isolated and no longer
interbreed with the rest of the population resulting in no gene
flow between the two groups.
Alleles within the groups continue to undergo random
mutations. The environment of each group may be different or
change (resulting in different selection pressures) so different
characteristics will be selected for and against.
The accumulation of mutations and changes in allele frequencies
over many generations eventually lead to large changes in
phenotype. The members of the different populations become so
different that they are no longer able to interbreed (to produce fertile
offspring). They are now reproductively isolated and are different
species.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the role of isolating
mechanisms in the evolution
of new species
→ the principles of artificial
selection and its uses
the ethical considerations
surrounding the use of
artificial selection.
Allopatric speciation
Allopatric speciation is the more common form of speciation and
happens when some members of a population are separated from the
rest of the group by a physical barrier such as a river or the sea - they
are geographically isolated. The environments of the different groups
will often be different and so will the selection pressures resulting in
different physical adaptations. Separation of a small group will often
result in the founder effect leading to genetic drift further enhancing
the differences between the populations.
A famous example of allopatric speciation is the
finches inhabiting the Galapagos Islands located in
the Pacific Ocean off the coast of South America.
For about two million years, small groups of finches,
from an original population on the mainland, have
flown to, and been stranded on, different islands. The
finches, separated from finches on other islands and
the mainland by the sea, have formed new colonies
on the different islands.
The finches have evolved and adapted to the
different environments, particularly food sources,
present on the islands and are an example of adaptive
radiation - where rapid organism diversification takes
place. As the finches are unable to breed with each
other, new species have evolved with unique beaks
adapted to the type of food available. Some species
food source
habitat
insects
trees
birds and fruit
ground
- cactus and cactus seeds
cacti
seeds
ancestral seed
eating ground finch
Figure 1 The range of beaks seen in species of finches found
in the Galapagos Islands
543
20
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
a
b
(iii) State what conclusions may be drawn
from the probability found in (d)(ii).
(3 marks)
Experiments have shown that loci G/g
and R/r are on the same chromosome of
the tomato plant genome. The two loci
are 44 map units apart.
Explain how the results of the test cross
shown in (d) could occur when the two
loci are on the same chromosome.
(3 marks)
OCR 2805/02 2008
Bread wheat is a hexaploid (6n) plant, with
three sets of paired chromosomes.
The likely origin of hexaploid bread wheat
from diploid wild grasses is shown in the
diagram.
wild grass species 1 wild grass species 2
(2n-14)
(2n - 14)
3
(i) Copy the diagram and write into the
spaces the numbers of chromosomes
in the gametes involved in cross 1 and
cross 2.
(2 marks)
(ii) With reference to the diagram,
explain what happened at stages
A and B to give emmer wheat and
bread wheat respectively. (2 marks)
For many years, plant breeders have
selectively bred wheat varieties with
progressively higher yields. However,
bread wheat cannot be interbred with
diploid species of grass to establish a
variety of wheat with new traits.
Explain why bread wheat cannot be
interbred with diploid species of grass to
establish new varieties of wheat. (2 marks)
The International Maize and Wheat
Improvement Centre (CIMMYT) in
Mexico has re-created cross 2 and stage B
of the diagram by interbreeding different
varieties of wild emmer wheat and goat
grass.
In this way more than 1000 varieties of
hexaploid 'synthetic wheat' have been
produced which can then be interbred
with bread wheat.
Explain the need for CIMMYT to maintain
seed banks of emmer wheat and goat
grass.
(8 marks)
OCR 2805/02 2008
cross 1
gamete
number of
chromosomes - .........
gamete
number of
chromosomes - ...
diploid grass
stage A
emmer wheat (4n - 28)
goat grass (2n - 14)
cross 2
gamete
number of
chromosomes - .........
gamete
number of
chromosomes -
triploid wheat
stage B
bread wheat (6n-42)
549
20
20.6 Speciation and artificial selection
have large, blunt beaks that can crack nuts, some have long, thin beaks
for getting to the nectar in flowers, and some have medium-sized beaks
which are ideal for catching insects.
The honeycreepers (family Drepanidinae) of the islands of Hawaii are
birds that are an even larger example of adaptive radiation. A single
ancestor species has led to the evolution of at least 54 species that
have filled every available niche in the different islands.
Panama is a narrow strip of land (isthmus) that joins North and South
America and separates the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, and was formed
about three million years ago. This was due to the movement of
tectonic plates and resulted in the separation of the organisms that had
originally occupied the same habitat when the two oceans were joined.
There were originally about 15 species of snapping shrimp present,
now there are 15 species present on one side of the isthmus and 15
different species present on the other side. Although the shrimp from
either side appear to be identical if males and females are mixed they
will snap at each other rather than mate.
A Figure 2 Snapping shrimp
In 1995 15 iguanas, Iguana iguana, survived a hurricane in the
Caribbean on a raft of uprooted trees. They eventually reached the
Caribbean island of Anguilla. These iguanas were the first of their
species to reach the island. If these iguanas are successful in colonising
the island it could be the start of an allopatric speciation. Of course, it
could take thousands, if not millions, of years before this is known.
Sympatric speciation
Sympatric speciation occurs within populations that share the same
habitat. It happens less frequently than allopatric speciation and is
more common in plants than animals. It can occur when members of
two different species interbreed and form fertile offspring - this often
happens in plants. The hybrid formed, which is a new species, will
have a different number of chromosomes to either parent and may no
longer be able to interbreed with members of either parent population.
This stops gene flow and reproductively isolates the hybrid organisms.
Examples of sympatric speciation include fungus-farming ants and
blind mole rats.
Fungus-farming ants cultivate the growth of fungi, which is their
source of nutrition, by supplying organic material to keep the fungi
growing. Parasitic ants have been found in one colony of these
industrious ants. Instead of helping in the growth of this fungus these
parasitic ants spend their time eating the fungi and reproducing.
The parasitic ants are sometimes ignored and at other times attacked
and killed. Genetic analysis has shown that although genetically
different from the fungus-farming ants the parasitic ants are, in fact,
their descendants. They are not a species of ant that has evolved
in geographic isolation but within the same habitat as a result of a
change in behaviour. It is believed that the genetic division of the
original species of ant only happened 37 000 years ago, not long in
evolutionary terms.
544
20.5 Evolution
Specification reference: 6.1.2
Evolution, the change in inherited characteristics of a group of
organisms over time, occurs owing to changes in the frequency of
different alleles within a population.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the factors that can affect the
evolution of a species.
Factors affecting evolution
There are a number of factors which lead to changes in the frequency
of alleles within a population and so the rate of evolution:
• Mutation is necessary for the existence of different alleles in the first
place and the formation of new alleles leads to genetic variation.
Sexual selection leads to alleles coding for characteristics which
improve mating success increasing in frequency.
Gene flow is the movement of alleles between populations.
Immigration and emigration result in changes of allele frequency
within a population.
Genetic drift occurs in small populations. This is a change in allele
frequency due to the random nature of mutation. The appearance of
a new allele will have a greater impact is more likely to increase in
number) in a smaller population than in a much larger population
where there is a greater number of alleles present in the gene pool.
Natural selection means that individuals having characteristics that
improve their chances of survival and so reproduction rate will
increase in number, as will the alleles coding for these characteristics.
This is how changes in the environment can lead to evolution.
Population genetics
Population genetics investigates how allele frequencies within
populations change over time. Changes in allele frequency are the
basis of evolution.
The gene pool of a large population ensures lots of genetic diversity
owing to the presence of many different genes and alleles. Genetic
diversity leads to variation within a population which is essential in
the process of natural selection. Selection pressures such as changes in
the environment, the presence of new diseases, prey, competitors, or
even human influences lead to evolution. The population can adapt to
change over time.
Small populations with limited genetic diversity cannot adapt to
change as easily and are more likely to become extinct. A new strain
of pathogen could wipe out a whole population.
The size of a population can be affected by many factors. Factors
which limit or decrease the size of a population are called limiting
factors. There are two types of limiting factors:
1
Density-dependent factors are dependent on population size and
include competition, predation, parasitism, and communicable
disease.
538
20
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
Large chi-squared values mean there is a big (significant difference
between the observed and expected results and the probability that
these differences are due to chance is low. There must be a reason,
other than chance, for the unexpected results.
The number of categories being compared in an investigation affects
the size of the chi-squared value calculated. The degrees of freedom
is the number of comparisons being made and is calculated as n-1,
where n is the number of categories or possible outcomes (phenotypes
in the case of phenotypic ratios) present in the analysis. For example,
if you were looking at yellow and green peas there would be two
categories and therefore one degree of freedom.
Study tip
A full table of chi-squared values
can be found in the appendix.
Table 1 Table of chi-squared values and the probability of each occurring at
different degrees of freedom (df)
p values
0.99 0.95 0.90 0.50 0.10 0.05 0.01
0.02 0.0039 0.016 0.46 2.71 3.84 6.63
0.02
0.10
0.21 1.39 4.60 5.99
9.21
0.12 0.35 0.58 2.37 6.25 781 11.35
4 0.30 0.71 1.06 3 .36 2.78 9.49 13.28
0.55 1.41 1.61 4.35 9.24 11.07 15.09
|
|
0.001
10.83
13.82
16.27
18.46
20.52
1
2
3
= null hypothesis
accepted
= null hypothesis not
rejected - another
factor involved
5
5
If the calculated x2 value is greater than the critical value found in a table
at 5% significance (p=0.05) we do not have sufficiently strong evidence
to reject our null hypothesis. Therefore we accept the null hypothesis
- there is no significant difference between what we observed and
what we expected. However if the calculated x value is less than the
critical value we reject the null hypothesis - some other factor, outside
our original expectation, is likely to be causing a significant difference
between expectation and observation.
The minimum x value that gives a 5% probability is called the critical
value. The critical value increases as the degrees of freedom increase.
If y2 is less than the critical value there is no significant difference
If x2 is greater than or equal to the critical value there is a significant
difference
Worked example: Calculating the chi-squared value
A monohybrid cross involving two plants heterozygous for purple
flowers was carried out.
purple
flowers
purple
flowers
cross
105
purple
flowers
45
white
flowers
533
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
20
some of the breed descriptions to prevent some of the
worst examples of this practice.
Selective breeding has been used for centuries in farming
to improve the quality and yield of crops and animal
produce.
club in 1873 after the different types or breeds of dog
had been developed by breeders and the standard
characteristics of each breed identified. With the limited
gene pool and lack of outbreeding it is inevitable that
unwanted traits are selected for also. Big dogs often
have hip or heart problems. The skull of the King
Charles spaniel is too small to accommodate the brain
comfortably leading to pain and discomfort. Bulldogs
usually have breathing difficulties due to the shape of
their noses. Dachshunds often have back problems and
suffer from epilepsy. Diseased dogs have effectively been
deliberately interbred. There are now moves to change
Discuss the ethical considerations of using selective
breeding to produce aesthetically pleasing show
dogs and high-yielding plants and animals for
agricultural use.
Gene banks
Seed banks keep samples of seeds from both wild type and
domesticated varieties. They are an important genetic resource. Gene
banks store biological samples, other than seeds, such as sperm or
eggs. They are usually frozen.
Owing to the problems caused by inbreeding, alleles from gene banks
are used to increase genetic diversity in a process called outbreeding.
Breeding unrelated or distantly related varieties is also a form of
outbreeding. This reduces the occurrence of homozygous recessives
and increases the potential to adapt to environmental change.
Synoptic link
You learnt about seed banks in
Topic 11.8, Methods of maintaining
biodiversity.
Summary questions
1 Describe, with examples, the difference between pre-zygotic
and post-zygotic reproductive barriers.
(4 marks)
2 Asmall population of adders in Sweden underwent inbreeding
depression when farming activities isolated them from other adder
populations. The numbers of stillborn and deformed offspring increased
as compared to the original population. Researchers introduced adders
from other population and the isolated population recovered and
produced a higher proportion of viable offspring.
a Name the type of breeding carried out by the researchers. (1 mark)
bExplain how this type of breeding reduces the problems
caused by inbreeding.
(3 marks)
3 Discuss why variation within a species has to be present for
speciation to occur.
(5 marks)
4 Allopatric speciation is considered by most biologists to be the most
common way in which new species evolve.
Outline the differences between sympatric speciation and allopatric
speciation and suggest why some biologists think sympatric
speciation is a rare event.
(5 marks)
547
20
Chapter 20 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 a The presence or absence of red
pigmentation in the outer scales of
onion bulbs is controlled by two genes,
A/a and B/b.
• The dominant allele, A, codes for
the production of a red anthocyanin
pigment.
Onion bulbs homozygous for the
recessive allele, a, produce no pigment
and are white.
The dominant allele, B, inhibits the
expression of allele A.
The recessive allele, b, allows
anthocyanin production.
(i) Describe the effect of allele B on
allele A.
(3 marks)
(ii) Two onion plants with the genotypes
AABB and aabb were cross-pollinated
and the resulting Fl generation
interbred to give an F2 generation.
Draw a genetic diagram of this cross
to show:
• the phenotypes of the parent plants
• the gametes
the genotypes and phenotypes of the
Fl and F2 generations
the ratio of phenotypes expected in
the F2 generation.
(8 marks)
b Most red-scaled onion bulbs produce a
colourless substance which makes them
resistant to a fungal infection called
'smudge'. Most white onion bulbs are
susceptible to 'smudge'. Suggest why:
(i) Resistance to 'smudge' is almost
always inherited together with red
pigmentation
(2 marks)
(ii) Some white onion bulbs are resistant
to 'smudge'.
(2 marks)
OCR 2805/02 2008
2 A pure-breeding variety of tomato plant,
variety A, produced red fruit which remained
green at their bases even when ripe.
Plants of variety A were crossed with another
pure-breeding variety, B, with orange fruit
which have no green bases when ripe.
The Fl generation plants all had red fruit
with green bases.
a Describe the interaction of the alleles,
(i) At the locus G/g, controlling green-
based or not green-based fruit
(1 mark)
(ii) At the locus R/r, controlling red or
orange fruit.
(1 mark)
b Using the symbols given in (a), state the
genotype of variety B.
(1 mark)
Plants from the Fl generation were test
crossed (backcrossed) to variety B. The
ratio of phenotypes expected in a dihybrid
test cross such as this is 1:1:1:1.
Using the symbols given in (a), draw
a genetic diagram of the test cross to
show that the expected ratio of offspring
phenotypes is 1:1:1:1. (4 marks)
d Two hundred randomly chosen offspring
from the test cross described in c had the
following phenotypes:
• red fruit with green bases 55
• red fruit with no green bases 45
• orange fruit with green bases 43
• orange fruit with no green bases 57
The x (chi-squared) test was performed
on these data, giving a calculated value
for x2 of 3.2.
(i) State the number of degrees of
freedom applicable to these data.
(1 mark)
Distribution of x2 values
degrees of
edom
probability P
0.10 0.05 0.02 0.01
2.71
3.84 5.41 6.64
4.615.99 782 9.21
6.25 7.82 9.84 11.35
778 9.49 11.67 13.28
2
3
0.001
10.38
13.82
16.27
18.47
(ii) Use the calculated value of x2 and
the table of probabilities provided in
the table to find the probability of
the results of the test cross departing
significantly by chance from the
expected ratio.
(1 mark)
548
20
20.4 Phenotypic ratios
In this case, the null hypothesis is that any differences in the
observed numbers of purple and white phenotypes from the
expected numbers are due to chance.
Step 1: The probability of getting each expected phenotype is
calculated
Purple is dominant to white, so there should be a 3:1
ratio in the offspring.
The chi-squared value is calculated based on this 3:1
hypothesis.
Step 2: The expected number of each phenotype based on the
probabilities and total number of offspring is calculated
by multiplying the expected proportion by the total:
There are 150 offspring so 150 x 2 = 112.5
150 x1 = 37.5
Step 3: Next, put your calculated and observed values into a table:
Phenotype Observed Expected
purple
105
3 x 150 = 112.5
white
45
1 x 150 = 37.5
total
150
Step 4: Then the chi-squared value can be calculated:
(O - E)
y? = L
E
Study tip
You do not need to learn the chi-
squared formula but you need to
know how apply it.
(105 – 112.5)2 (45 – 37,5)2
112.5
37.5
56.25 56.25
K™ 112.5 * 37.5
x2 = 0.5 + 1.5 = 2.0
Step 5: The chi-square value is determined from the chi-squared
distribution table at the 0.05 probability level (p) for the
correct degrees of freedom. Remember this is n - 1. In
this case there are only two phenotypes son = 2 and the
degrees of freedom is 2 - 1 = 1.
The table value is 3.84.
Step 6: Because 2.0 < 3.84, the null hypothesis is accepted. The
difference between the predicted and actual cross results
is not significant (at the 5% probability level). Any
difference between the expected results and the actual
results is due to chance.
If the xvalue had been greater than 3.84, it would
indicate that the differences in the observed results were
due to another factor such as gene linkage or a new or
different way of inheriting alleles.
534
20
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE
AND VARIATION
20.1 Variation and inheritance
Specification reference: 6.1.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the contribution of both
environmental and genetic
factors to phenotypic
variation
how sexual reproduction
can lead to genetic variation
within a species
the meaning of the
terms continuous and
discontinuous variation and
their genetic basis.
Members of different species are, usually, clearly different from each
other and even members of the same species are rarely identical
so variation is an important feature of living organisms. Variation
arises as a result of mutations - changes to the genetic code which
are random and constantly taking place. Variation is essential for the
process of natural selection - and therefore evolution.
You have already learnt about how organisms within a species vary.
It is important to remember that variation can occur both as a result
of environmental variation and genetic variation. In the majority of
cases both play a role in determining an organism's characteristics -
examples of this include chlorosis in plants and the body mass of
an animal.
Chlorosis
Most plants are genetically coded to produce large quantities of
chlorophyll, the green pigment that is vital for photosynthesis and
gives leaves their green colour. Some plants, however, suffer from a
condition known as chlorosis, when the leaves look pale or yellow.
This occurs because the cells are not producing the normal amount of
chlorophyll. This lack of chlorophyll reduces the ability of the plant to
make food by photosynthesis.
Most plants which show chlorosis have normal genes coding for
chlorophyll production. The change in their phenotype is the result of
environmental factors. There are many different environmental factors
which cause chlorosis, each having a different effect on the physiology of
the plant but causing the same change in phenotype. Examples include:
. Lack of light – for example, when a toy or gardening tool is
left on a lawn. In the absence of light, plants will turn off their
chlorophyll production to conserve resources. In this case,
chlorosis only occurs where the plant gets no light.
Mineral deficiencies - for example, a lack of iron or magnesium.
Iron is needed as a cofactor by some of the enzymes that
make chlorophyll, and magnesium is found at the heart of the
chlorophyll molecule. If either of these elements are lacking in
the soil, a plant simply cannot make chlorophyll and gradually
all the leaves will become yellow.
Virus infections – when viruses infect plants, they interfere with the
metabolism of cells. A common symptom is yellowing in the infected
tissues as they can no longer support the synthesis of chlorophyll.
Figure 1 Normal leaf (left), leaf with
chlorosis (right)
520
20
20.4 Phenotypic ratios
Consider the biochemical pathway shown in Figure 3, where four
enzymes a, b, c, and d are required to produce a pigment responsible
for the colour of a flower petal. Four genes a, b, c, and d need to
be expressed to produce these enzymes. If one of these genes is not
expressed then one step will be missing, and the petal will not have
the expected colour.
The lack of the enzyme normally produced when gene a, b, or c is
expressed means the intermediate molecule necessary for the next
reaction in the sequence is not produced. This results in a lack of
substrate for the next enzyme in the pathway and so the expression of
this gene will not be observed in the phenotype. The gene is effectively
‘masked' by the lack of expression of the previous gene in the pathway.
If enzyme d is not produced then precursor D will not be converted
to a pigment. This means it is often hard to observe the expression of
genes a, b, and c in the phenotype. The disabled gene d is likely to
mask their expression.
A gene that is affected by another gene is said to be hypostatic and a
gene that affects the expression of another gene is said to be epistatic.
precursor
precursor
precursor
MC
precursor
Thiamine
Enzyme
Enzyme
Enzyme
Enzyme
Gene a
Gene b
Genec
Gened
Figure 3 The genes a, b, and c code for enzymes that catalyse the production
of the substrate needed for the next reaction in the sequence. Gene d produces an
enzyme that catalyses the production of the pigment from precursor D
Dominant and recessive epistasis
An epistatic gene may influence the activity of other genes as result of
the presence of dominant or recessive alleles.
In the example previously, if the presence of two recessive alleles
at a gene locus led to the lack of an enzyme then it would be called
recessive epistasis.
Dominant epistasis occurs if a dominant allele results in a gene having
an effect on another gene. This would happen if an epistatic gene (not
present in this pathway) coded for an enzyme that modified one of the
precursor molecules in the pathway. The next enzyme in the pathway
would then lack a suitable substrate molecule and so the pigment
would again not be produced. All of the genes in the sequence would
be effectively 'masked'.
Labrador colours
The colour of Labrador dogs is produced as a result of the pigment
melanin being deposited in the skin and fur. One gene codes for the
production of the pigment and has the alleles B (dominant, black
pigment produced) and b (recessive, brown pigment produced).
A second gene codes for where the pigment is deposited and, again,
has two alleles E (dominant, pigment deposited in the skin and fur)
and e (recessive, pigment deposited in the skin only).
536
20
20.1 Variation and inheritance
Any changes the environment makes to a person's phenotype are
not inherited - these are referred to as modifications. Only mutations
(changes to the DNA) in the gametes can be passed on to the offspring.
A Figure 5 Dimples in your cheeks are
caused by a dominant allele. By simply
looking at this man you cannot tell if he
is heterozygous or homozygous for this
dominant allele
It is not always possible to determine an organism's genotype from its
phenotype owing to the dominance of particular alleles. A dominant
allele is the version of the gene that will always be expressed if
present in an organism. This means an individual showing the
dominant characteristic in their phenotype could have one or two
copies of the dominant gene - you can't tell from their appearance.
A recessive allele, however, will only be expressed if two copies of
this allele are present in an organism. This means if an individual has a
recessive phenotype, you also know their genotype - they must have
two alleles coding for the recessive phenotype.
A number of key terms are used to describe an organism's genotype
for a particular characteristic:
Homozygous - they have two identical alleles for a characteristic.
The organism could be homozygous dominant (contain two alleles
for the dominant phenotype) or homozygous recessive contain two
alleles for the recessive phenotype).
Heterozygous - they have two different alleles for a characteristic.
In this case the allele for the dominant phenotype will be expressed.
Figure 6 In sexually reproducing
organisms, most chromosomes
occur in pairs known as homologous
chromosomes (where one of each pair
comes from each parent). The allele of
a particular gene occurs in the same
position on each of the homologous
chromosomes. This is known as its locus.
The diagram shows a pair of homologous
chromosomes from a pea plant
Continuous and discontinuous variation
The variation of a characteristic displayed within a species can be
divided into two groups - those which show continuous variation,
and those which show discontinuous variation. Remember - in
discontinuous variation individuals fall into distinct groups (for
example, blood groups) and normally only one gene is involved and the
environment has little, if any, effect (Figure 7). In continuous variation
there are two extremes, with every degree of variation possible in
between (Figure 8). Examples would include your height or weight.
Many genes will be involved, and the environment has a large effect.
Table 1 summarises some of the important differences between
continuous and discontinuous variation.
Table 1
Synoptic link
Continuous variation
Discontinuous variation
definition
To remind yourself how meiosis
creates variation, for example
through crossing over and
independent assortment, look
back at Topic 6.3, Meiosis.
a characteristic that can
take any value within a
range
a characteristic that can
only appear in specific
(discrete) values
cause of variation
genetic control
genetic and environmental mostly genetic
polygenes - controlled by one or two genes
a number of genes
leaf surface area
blood group
animal mass
albinism
skin colour
round and wrinkled pea shape
examples
522
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
20
In summary, even though genetic factors in a plant are likely to
code for green leaves, the environment plays a key role in the final
leaf appearance.
Animal body mass
Within a species, the body mass of individual animals varies. An
organism's body mass is determined by a combination of both genetic
and environmental factors. In the majority of cases dramatic variations
in size such as obesity and being severely underweight are a result of
environmental factors. For example, the amount (and quality) of foods
eaten, the quantity of exercise which the organism gets, or the presence
of disease can affect the body mass. Being extremely overweight or
underweight can result in significant health problems for an animal.
Figure 2 This severely obese cat has
an extremely large body mass as a result
of overfeeding and lack of exercise
Occasionally obesity can be a result of the genetic make-up of
an organism. The obese mouse in Figure 3 has a mutation on
chromosome 7. This mutation causes the pattern of fat deposition in
its body to be altered. Scientific studies have shown that this gene acts
in conjunction with other genes that regulate the energy balance of
the body, and as a result mice possessing the mutation grow 35-50%
fatter by middle age than a normal mouse would.
A Figure 3 Left - obese mouse with a
mutated chromosome 7. Right - normal
mouse with normal chromosome 7
Creating genetic variation
Genetic variation is created by the versions of genes you inherit
from your parents. For most genes there are a number of different
possible alleles or variants. The individual mixture of alleles an
organism inherits influences the characteristics they will display. This
combination is determined by sexual reproduction involving meiosis
(the formation of gametes), and the random fusion of gametes at
fertilisation. This results in the vast genetic variation seen between
individuals of the same species.
Synoptic link
You learnt about genetic and
environmental variation and
examples of these in Topic 10.5,
Types of variation. In this topic you
also learnt about the detail of how
sexual reproduction and meiosis
lead to genetic variation.
Study tip
For most genes in your body two
alleles are inherited (one from each
parent). These alleles may be the
same or different versions of the
gene. The combination of alleles an
organism inherits for a characteristic
is known as their genotype-
this is the genetic make-up of an
organism in respect of that gene.
The observable characteristics
of an organism are known as
its phenotype (you will learn
more about two special cases of
inheritance known as codominance
and sex linkage in Topic 20.2,
Monogenetic inheritance). The
actual characteristics that an
organism displays are also often
influenced by the environment.
Remember all individuals of the
same species have the same
genes but not necessarily the
same alleles of these genes. Many
people refer to alleles and genes
interchangeably - make sure
you understand the difference
between these words, and use the
terms correctly.
A Figure 4 Doctors monitor the height
of children at routine developmental
check-ups. The genotype of this child
may determine that they have the
potential to grow to 1.9 m, but the child's
final height is influenced greatly by their
diet. For example, a shortage of calcium
when the child is young can restrict bone
development, therefore preventing them
reaching their maximum potential height
521
20
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
Corn and the chi-squared (x2) test of
A genetic study was carried out to determine if these two
genes are linked.
There will almost always be differences between
expected and observed results because of the random
nature of the processes involved. Statistical tests like the
chi-squared test are performed to determine whether
these differences are due to chance alone or caused by
some other factor that may not have been considered.
Two maize plants that were heterozygous for both colour
and texture were cross-fertilised and an ear of corn
produced as a result of this cross was analysed.
The results are shown in Table 2.
Maize plants have been used for many years to study
genetic crosses. An ear of corn contains around 500
kernels, or seeds. The seeds are produced as the result of
the cross-fertilisation of two maize plants. The colour of the
seeds is controlled by one gene with a dominant (P. purple)
allele and a recessive (p, yellow) allele. Another gene
determines the texture of the seeds and there is again a
dominant (R, round) allele and recessive (r, wrinkled) allele.
1 State the ratio of phenotypes that you expect from
this cross if the genes are not linked.
2 Copy and complete the table.
3 Show how you would use the chi-squared
distribution table, shown in Table 1, to determine
the critical value for these results.
State, giving your reasons, the conclusions you
would make from your statistical analysis of these
results.
Figure 3
Table 2 Shows the number of each of the different types of kernel produced from a cross between two maize
plants which are both heterozygous for colour and texture
Grain phenotype
Expected number
Observed
number
Observed
ratio
Expected
ratio
(observed -
expected]2 / expected
purple and smooth
216
381 *
381 x
= 214
=71
purple and shrunken
79
yellow and smooth
65
yellow and shrunken
21
chi-squared value:
Epistasis
Epistasis is the interaction of genes at different loci. Gene regulation
is a form of epistasis with regulatory genes controlling the activity of
structural genes, for example, the lac operon. Gene interaction also
occurs in biochemical pathways involving only structural genes.
Synoptic Link
You learnt about the lac operon
in Topic 19.2, Control of gene
expression.
It was originally thought that all genes were expressed independently,
and therefore their effects on the phenotype seen. Now it is known
that many genes interact epistatically. It is the results of these
interactions that we see in the phenotypes of living organisms. The
characteristics of plants and animals that show continuous variation
involve multiple genes and epistasis occurs frequently.
535
20.4 Phenotypic ratios
Specification reference: 6.1.2
The ratios of phenotypes that you would expect to see in the offspring
produced from a dihybrid cross can be easily calculated as long as you
know which alleles are dominant and which are recessive. The actual
numbers may vary from those expected to some extent because the
process is random but the differences should not be large. The larger
the sample the closer the numbers will be to the expected ratio.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the use of phenotypic ratios
to identify linkage (autosomal
and sex linkage) and epistasis
using the chi-squared (x2) test
to determine the significance
of the difference between
observed and expected results.
Linkage
The ratios observed in many dihybrid crosses differ significantly
from those expected. This is often due to linkage meaning that the
genes are located on the same chromosome. In Topic 20.2 you met
the idea of sex linkage, when a particular gene is located on the sex
chromosomes. The effects of sex linkage can be seen in conditions
such as haemophilia and red-green colour blindness.
expected
observed
When the genes that are linked are found on one of the other pairs
of chromosomes it is called autosomal linkage. Linked genes are
inherited as one unit - there is no independent assortment during
meiosis unless the alleles are separated by chiasmata. They tend to be
inherited together.
Linked genes cannot undergo the normal random 'shuffling' of alleles
during meiosis and the expected ratios will not be produced in the
offspring. The linked genes are inherited effectively as a single unit.
Body colour and wing length, for example, are linked characteristics in
fruit flies. The allele B is responsible for a brown body and is dominant
to b which results in a black body. The allele V is responsible for long
wings and is dominant to the allele v which results in short wings.
A heterozygous brown bodied, long winged fly (BbVv) was crossed with A Figure 1 A test cross involving linked
a homozygous black bodied, short winged fly (bbvv). The expected and genes does not produce the expected
observed phenotypic ratios from this cross are shown in Figure 1.
ratio of phenotypes in the offspring.
There is a larger proportion of brown
The homozygous parent can only produce by gametes and the
flies with long wings and black flies with
heterozygous parent produces mainly (BV) and (by) gametes as the
short wings
alleles are linked. The heterozygous parent will produce a few bV)
gametes and Bv) gametes due to crossing over,
which results in the separation of some of the
recombinants
linked genes. This is the reason for the small
A Aaah
number of brown flies with short wings and
black flies with long wings. These are called
recombinant offspring (they have different
combinations of alleles than either parent).
The closer the genes are on a chromosome homologous pair crossing over
gametes
the less likely they are to be separated during A Figure 2 During crossing over in prophase l of meiosis, non-sister
crossing over and the fewer recombinant
chromatids of a homologous pair of chromosomes may break and
offspring produced.
reform. As these chromatids break at the same point, any gene
loci below the point of the break will be exchanged as a result of
recombination creating new gene combinations
531
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
20
G = allele for green pods
g = allele for yellow pods
All of the offspring are heterozygous. This
means that all plants will have green pods as
this is the dominant allele. These offspring are
known as the F, generation.
parental phenotypes
parental genotypes
green pods
yellow pods
GG
(arbitrarily assumed (arbitrarily assumed
as maleo)
as female )
meiosis
meiosis
Heterozygous genetic cross
The cross in Figure 2 shows what happens if
you take two of the heterozygous offspring
from the first generation and cross them
together.
gametes
offspring (F1)
genotypes
GG
o gametes
gametes G G
gGgGg
GgGg
all plants have green pods (Gg)
offspring (F1) phenotypes
A Figure 1
Study tip
F1 offspring phenotypes
F1 offspring genotypes
green pods
Gg
meiosis
green pods
Gg
meiosis
Potential outcomes from genetic
crosses can be expressed
in different forms which are
mathematically equivalent:
gametes
gametes
o
gametes G
G GG
Probability Ratio
4 in 4 4:0
3 in 4 3:1
2 in 4 2:2
(or 1 in 2) (or 1:1)
Percentage
100%
75%
50%
offspring (F2)
genotypes
Gg
Gg
1 in 4
1:3
25%
O in 4
0:4
0%
offspring (F2) ratio of 3 plants with green (GG and Gg) pods
phenotypes to 1 plant with yellow (gg) pods
Figure 2
The offspring produced from this cross are known as the F, generation.
Offspring will be produced in a ratio of three pea plants with green
pods to one pea plant with yellow pods.
Codominance
Codominance occurs when two different alleles occur for a gene -
both of which are equally dominant. As a result both alleles of the
gene are expressed in the phenotype of the organism if present.
One example of this condition is the colour of snapdragon flowers.
Two equally dominant alleles exist, each of which codes for the colour
of the flower:
An allele that codes for red flowers – the allele codes for the production
of an enzyme which catalyses the production of red pigment from a
colourless precursor.
An allele that codes for white flowers - the allele codes for an altered
version of the enzyme which does not catalyse the production of the
pigment, therefore the flowers are white.
A Figure 3 Red Snapdragon flowers
are produced by a plant which is
homozygous for the allele coding for the
enzyme that catalyses the production of
red pigment
525
20
20.2 Monogenic inheritance
In this example of codominance, three colours of flower can be produced:
1 Red flowers - the plant is homozygous for the allele coding for the
production of red pigment.
White flowers – the plant is homozygous for the allele coding for
no pigment production.
Pink flowers - the plant is heterozygous. The single allele present
which codes for red pigmentation produces enough pigment to
produce pink flowers.
The genetic cross in Figure 6 shows how pink flowers are produced.
Two of the pink flowers produced in the F, generation are then
crossed in the second cross.
Figure 4 White snapdragon flowers
are produced by a plant which is
homozygous for the allele coding for the
enzyme which does not catalyse the
production of pigment
When studying codominance, upper and lower case letters are not
used to represent the alleles, as this would imply one allele is dominant
and the other recessive. Instead a letter is chosen to represent the gene,
in this example C for colour of flowers. The different alleles are then
represented using a second letter which is shown as a superscript. In
this example CR is used to represent the allele coding for red flowers
and CW for the allele coding for white flowers.
CR= allele for red pigment production
CW = allele for no pigment production
parental
phenotypes
parental
genotypes
red flowers white flowers
CR CR CW CW
parental
phenotypes
parental
genotypes
pink flowers pink flowers
CRCW
C C
meiosis meiosis
A Figure 5 Pink snapdragon flowers are
produced by a plant which is heterozygous
for both alleles
meiosis
meiosis
gametes
gametes
offspring
genotypes
gametes
offspring
genotypes
gametes
o gametes
o gametes
CR
CR CW
CR CW
(CR CW)
offspring 100% pink flowers
phenotypes
Figure 6 Production of pink
snapdragon flowers
offspring 50% pink flowers (CR CW)
phenotypes 25% red flowers (CR CR)
25% white flowers (CW CW)
Figure 7 Genetic cross between two
snapdragons displaying pink flowers
Multiple alleles
In the previous examples, you have learnt about characteristics coded
by a gene with two alleles. Some genes have more than two versions,
they have multiple alleles. However, as an organism carries only two
versions of the gene (one on each of the homologous chromosomes)
only two alleles can be present in an individual.
Your blood group is determined by a gene with multiple alleles. The
immunoglobulin gene (Gene I) codes for the production of different
526
20
20.4 Phenotypic ratios
The recombination frequency is a measure of the amount of crossing
over that has happened in meiosis.
number of recombinant offspring
Recombination frequency = -
total number of offspring
A recombination frequency of 50% indicates that there is no linkage
and the genes are on separate chromosomes. Less than 50% indicates
that there is gene linkage and the random process of independent
assortment has been hindered. As the degree of crossing over reduces,
the recombination frequency also gets smaller. The degree of crossing
over is determined by how close the genes are on a chromosome. The
closer they are the less likely they will be separated during crossing
over and vice versa.
The recombination frequencies for a number of characteristics coded
for by genes on the same chromosome can be used to map the genes
on the chromosome. A recombination frequency of 1% relates to a
distance of one map unit on a chromosome.
Chi-squared test
The observed results from a genetic cross will almost always differ to
some extent from the expected results and this will be due to chance.
If you toss a coin 10 times you would be unlikely to get five heads and
five tails. The observed ratio of heads to tails will probably be quite
different from the expected ratio. This does not mean there is anything
wrong with the coin. If the same coin were tossed a thousand
times you would see less relative difference between the expected
and observed ratios. The number of observations made, therefore,
determines how chance affects the results.
It is important when making comparisons between observed and
expected results that it is known whether any differences are due to
chance or if there is a reason for the differences (they are significant).
The chi-squared (x2) test is a statistical test that measures the size of
the difference between the results you actually get (observe) and those
you expected to get. It helps you determine whether differences in the
expected and observed results are significant or not, by comparing the
sizes of the differences and the numbers of observations.
The chi-squared test is conventionally used to test the null hypothesis.
The null hypothesis is that there is no significant difference between
what we expect and what we observe - in other words any differences
we do see are due to chance. Calculated chi squared values are used to
find the probability of the difference being due to chance alone.
The chi-squared formula is:
x = q (0-E)2
Where:
x2 = the test statistic
X = the sum of
O = observed frequencies
E = expected frequencies
532
20.2 Monogenic inheritance
Specification reference: 6.1.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► genetic diagrams to show
patterns of inheritance.
To explain how characteristics are inherited you need to be able to
show how genes are passed on from one generation to the next.
This is normally shown using a genetic cross. Most commonly the
inheritance of a single gene is shown, this is known as monogenic
inheritance. The basic laws by which characteristics are inherited
were established by Gregor Mendel, a scientist and monk working in
the 19th century.
Performing a genetic cross
There are a number of key steps you should follow when analysing
a genetic cross. This ensures that your diagram explains fully what is
happening to the genes of an organism during fertilisation (and helps
you to avoid making errors):
Step 1 - State the phenotype of both the parents.
Step 2 - State the genotype of both parents. To do this, assign a letter
code to represent the alleles of the gene being studied. A
capital letter should be used to represent the dominant allele
and its lower case form to represent the recessive allele.
For example, if studying the inheritance of an animal's fur
colour, you may choose B to represent brown fur (dominant)
and b to represent white fur (recessive).
Step 3 - State the gametes of each parent. It is common practice to
circle the letters, for example, G.
Step 4 - Use a Punnett Square to show the results of the random
fusion of gametes during fertilisation. Remember to label the
gametes on the edges of the square.
Step 5 - State the proportion of each genotype which are produced
among the offspring. This can be in the form of a percentage,
ratio, or 'x out of y offspring ....
Step 6 - State the corresponding phenotype for each of the possible
genotypes. It must be clear that you know which phenotype
results from each genotype.
Study tip
It is standard practice to always
state the dominant allele
(if present in a genotype) first.
Do not use two different letters
for the allele as this means the
characteristic is codominant.
Homozygous genetic cross
Mendel carried out many of his famous experiments on pea plants.
Pea pods come in two colours - green and yellow. The cross in
Figure 1 shows what happens when a homozygous green pea pod
plant is crossed with a homozygous yellow pea pod plant. The allele
for green pea pods is dominant. Organisms that contain homozygous
alleles for a particular gene are known as true breeding or pure
breeding individuals. Therefore in this experiment Mendel was
studying what happened when two true breeding individuals are
crossed.
524
20
20.3 Dihybrid inheritance
Fi offspring phenotype
Fi offspring genotype
yellow round seeded
YyRr
Meiosis
X yellow round seeded
YyRr
Meiosis
gametes
YR Yr yr yr
YR
Yr yr
yr
Y gametes
offspring (F)
genotypes
gametes
YR
Yr
YR D
yr
YR
YYRR
YYRr
YYRR
YyRr
Yr
YYRr
YyRr
Yyrr
VYYTT
YyRr
YR
YYRR
YYRR
yyRr
yr
YyRr
Yyrr
yyRr
Wyrr
offspring 9 yellow round seeded: 3 yellow wrinkled seeded: 3 green round seeded: 1 green wrinkled
F2 phenotypes (YYRR, YYRr, YYRR, YyRr) (YYrr, Yyrr)
(YYRR, yyRr) (yyrr)
A Figure 3
Synoptic Link
Look back at Topic 6.3, Meiosis to
remind yourself of the different
stages of meiosis.
When the phenotypes of the 16 possible combinations of alleles are
identified (as shown in Figure 3), it is found that the expected ratio
in the F, generation is nine pea plants producing yellow round seeds,
to three pea plants producing yellow wrinkled seeds to three pea
plants producing green round seeds, to one pea plant producing green
wrinkled seeds.
It is worth remembering that this is the expected ratio of the four
different phenotypes. As with all genetic crosses the actual ratio of
offspring produced can differ from the expected. This may because
The fertilisation of gametes is a random process so in a small
sample a few chance events can lead to a skewed ratio.
The genes being studied are both on the same chromosome. These
are known as linked genes. If no crossing over occurs the alleles
for the two characteristics will always be inherited together.
Summary questions
1 State the difference between monogenic inheritance and
dihybrid inheritance.
(1 mark)
2 State and explain two reasons why the offspring produced from a
particular genetic cross may differ from the expected ratio. (2 marks)
Work through a dihybrid genetic cross between a pea plant which
produces green wrinkled seeds and a heterozygous pea plant which
produces yellow round seeds to determine the expected ratio of the
F, offspring.
(6 marks)
530
20.3 Dihybrid inheritance
Specification reference: 6.1.2
In the previous topic you learnt how genes were inherited through
monogenic inheritance. In reality, thousands of genes are inherited
during fertilisation. Dihybrid crosses are used to show the inheritance
of two genes and this is known as dihybrid inheritance.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
genetic diagrams to show
patterns of inheritance
including dihybrid inheritance.
Dihybrid cross
A dihybrid cross is used to show the inheritance of two different
characteristics, caused by two genes, which may be located on
different pairs of homologous chromosomes. Each of these genes can
have two or more alleles.
A dihybrid cross is set out in a very similar format to the one used
when studying a monohybrid cross - however, four alleles (two for
each characteristic) are shown at each stage instead of two.
A classic example is the inheritance of seed phenotype in pea plants.
The seeds a pea plant produces can be produced in two different
colours - yellow or green. They are also produced in two different
shapes - round or wrinkled.
A Figure 1 Pea seeds can be round or
wrinkled. Round seeds are caused by
the dominant allele
The following codes can be used to represent the alleles:
Y - allele coding for yellow seeds (this is the dominant allele)
y - allele coding for green seeds (this is the recessive allele)
R- allele coding for round seeds (this is the dominant allele)
r - allele coding for wrinkled seeds (this is the recessive allele)
In the dihybrid cross in Figure 2, a true breeding homozygous
pea plant with yellow round seeds is crossed with a true breeding
homozygous pea plant with green wrinkled seeds.
All of the offspring produced in the
F, generation will have a heterozygous
genotype - YyRr. Therefore, they will
all produce yellow round seeds as they
will all have inherited one of each of the
dominant alleles from the yellow round
seeded parent.
parental phenotype
parental genotype
yellow round seeded x green wrinkled seeded
YYRR
yyrr
meiosis
meiosis
gametes
YR YR
yr
yr
In the second example in Figure 2, two
of the pea plants grown from the seeds of
the F, generation are now crossed.
gametes
offspring Fı genotypes
YR
YR
o gametes
Yr
YyRr
YyRr
Yr
YyRr
YyRr
offspring F1 phenotypes all yellow round seeded
A Figure 2
529
PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION
20
women
percentage of population
frequency
men
AB
blood group
A Figure 7 An example of discontinuous variation showing
individuals falling into distinct categories
55 60 65 70 75 80 85
height/inches
A Figure 8 Graph showing the range of heights of a large sample
of men and women. It should be noted that sex is a discontinuous
characteristic but within each category (male or female) there is
continuous variation (height)
two genes
three genes
many genes
one gene
Aa
AAaa
AAAaaa
percentage of population
Aaaa
AAAa
AA
aaaaaa
AAAAAA
aaaa
AAAA
variation in phenotype
Figure 9 Series of graphs showing how the type of variation changes as the number of genes responsible for the production
of a characteristic increases
Summary questions
Synoptic link
1 State the difference between a homozygous and
heterozygous genotype.
(1 mark)
Look back at Topic 10.6,
Representing variation graphically
for more examples of continuous
and discontinuous variation.
2 Explain the difference between the phenotype and
genotype of an oak tree.
(2 marks)
3 Using named examples, state and explain the difference
between continuous and discontinuous variation.
(6 marks)
523
