EXCHANGE SURFACES
AND BREATHING
7.1 Specialised exchange surfaces
Specification reference: 3.1.1
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the need for specialised
exchange surfaces
► the features of an efficient
exchange surface.
Imagine a microscopic single-celled organism such as Amoeba
drifting in the ocean currents. Now think of a dolphin, swimming
at high speeds, hunting fish or playing with other dolphins. They
both need glucose and oxygen for cellular respiration and produce
waste carbon dioxide, which must be removed. However, the
quantities involved and the distances the substances need to travel,
are very different.
The need for specialised exchange surfaces
In microscopic organisms such as Amoeba all of the oxygen needed
by the organism, and the waste carbon dioxide produced, can be
exchanged with the external environment by diffusion through the
cell surface. The distances the substances have to travel are very small.
There are two main reasons why diffusion alone is enough to supply
the needs of single-celled organisms:
The metabolic activity of a single-celled organism is usually low, so
the oxygen demands and carbon dioxide production of the cell are
relatively low.
The surface area to volume (SA:V) ratio of the organism is
large (see below).
A Figure 1 Getting oxygen into the
muscle cells of a dolphin isn't as easy as
getting it into an Amoeba
As organisms get larger they can be made up of millions or even
billions of cells arranged in tissues, organs, and organ systems. Their
metabolic activity is usually much higher than most single-celled
organisms. Think of the dolphin in Figure 1. The amount of energy
used in moving through the water means the oxygen demands of
the muscle cells deep in the body will be high and they will produce
lots of carbon dioxide. The distance between the cells where the
oxygen is needed and the supply of oxygen is too far for effective
diffusion to take place. What's more, the bigger the organism, the
smaller the SA: V ratio. So gases can't be exchanged fast enough or
in large enough amounts for the organism to survive.
Surface area : volume ratio - modelling an organism
The SA:V ratio is important in many areas of biology. A sphere is
a useful shape for modelling cells or organisms. A series of simple
calculations shows clearly how the SA:V ratio changes as the
organism gets bigger, and why size matters so much.
Synoptic link
You have already learnt about
diffusion in Topic 5.3, Diffusion.
154
7.4 Ventilation and gas exchange in other organisms
diffusion would not be enough to supply their inner cells with the
oxygen they need, and their scaly outer covering does not allow
gaseous exchange. However, bony fish have evolved a ventilatory
system adapted to take oxygen from the water and get rid of carbon
dioxide into the water. They maintain a flow of water in one
direction over the gills, which are their organs of gaseous exchange.
Gills have the large surface area, good blood supply, and thin layers
needed for successful gaseous exchange. In bony fish they are
contained in a gill cavity and covered by a protective operculum
(a bony flap), which is also active in maintaining a flow of water
over the gills (Figure 4).
water with high
oxygen content
operculum
(flap that covers gills)
eye
gill lamellae, with their
rich blood supply and
large surface area, are
the main site of gaseous
exchange in the fish
nostril
first gill arch
%%%%
mouth-
gill filaments occur in large
stacks (gill plates) and need
a flow of water to keep them
apart, exposing the large
surface area needed for
gaseous exchange
bony gill arch supports the structure of the gills
arrangement of
the gill stacks
efferent blood vessel carries the blood leaving the gills
in the opposite direction to the incoming water,
maintaining a steep concentration gradient
afferent blood vessel brings
blood into the system
Figure 4 The gills are the
site of gaseous exchange in
bony fish and have a number
of adaptations for their role
in supplying oxygen and
removing carbon dioxide
The gills make up the gaseous exchange surface of the fish. They
have many features in common with both mammalian and insect
gaseous exchange surfaces. However, they also have particular
challenges. To allow efficient gas exchange at all times, fish need to
maintain a continuous flow of water over the gills, even when they
are not moving. They also need to carry out gaseous exchange as
effectively as possible in water, a medium where diffusion is slower
than in air.
Water flow over the gills
When fish are swimming they can keep a current of water flowing
over their gills simply by opening their mouth and operculum.
However, when the fish stops moving, the flow of water also stops.
The more primitive cartilaginous fish such as the sharks and rays
often rely on continual movement to ventilate the gills. This is
known as ram ventilation - they just ram the water past the
gills. However, most bony fish do not rely on movement-generated
water flow over the gills. They have evolved a sophisticated system
involving the operculum, which allows them to move water over
their gills all the time (Figure 5).
168
EXCHANGE SURFACES AND BREATHING
Discontinuous gas exchange cycles in insects
Discontinuous gas exchange cycles (DGC) have been found to be relatively
common in many species of insects. In DCG spiracles have three states -
closed, open, and fluttering.
• When the spiracles are closed no gases move in or out of the insect.
Oxygen moves into the cells by diffusion from the tracheae and carbon
dioxide diffuses into the body fluids of the insect where it is held in a
process called buffering.
When the spiracles flutter, they open and close rapidly. This moves
fresh air into the tracheae to renew the supply of oxygen, while
minimising water loss.
When carbon dioxide levels build up really high in the body fluids of the
insect, the spiracles open widely and carbon dioxide diffuses out rapidly.
There may also be pumping movements of the thorax and abdomen
when the spiracles are open to maximise gaseous exchange.
Originally scientists thought discontinuous gas exchange was an adaptation
for water conservation in insects. Now the evidence suggests this is not
the case and there are a number of conflicting theories about the adaptive
advantages of discontinuous gas exchange for insects, which include
helping gaseous exchange in insects that spend at least part of their lives
in enclosed spaces such as burrows, or reducing the entry of fungal spores,
which can parasitise an insect. This is still an area of very active research
and argument.
1 Suggest one way in which each of the given theories on the value of
DGC as an adaptation might be investigated.
Respiratory systems in bony fish
Animals that get their oxygen from water do not need to try and
prevent water loss from their gaseous exchange surfaces as land
animals do, but there are other difficulties to overcome.
Water is 1000 times denser than air. It is 100 times more viscous (thick)
and has a much lower oxygen content. To cope with the viscosity
of water and the slow rate of oxygen diffusion, fish have evolved
very specialised respiratory systems that are different from those of
land-dwelling animals. It would use up far too much energy to move
dense, viscous water in and out of lung-like respiratory organs. Moving
water in one direction only is much simpler and more economical in
energy terms.
Gills
Bony fish such as trout and cod are relatively big, active animals
that live almost exclusively in water. Because they are very active,
their cells have a high oxygen demand. Their SA:V ratio means that
167
EXCHANGE SURFACES AND BREATHING
opercular valve closed
top view
buccal cavity
gills
gill arches
ww
-- mouth open-
operculum
buccal cavity
expanding
The mouth is opened and the floor of the buccal cavity (mouth) is lowered. This
increases the volume of the buccal cavity. As a result the pressure in the cavity
drops and water moves into the buccal cavity. At the same time the opercular
valve is shut and the opercular cavity containing the gills expands. This lowers the
pressure in the opercular cavity containing the gills. The floor of the buccal cavity
starts to move up, increasing the pressure there so water moves from the buccal
cavity over the gills.
opercular
valve open
top view
mouth closed
buccal cavity constricting
The mouth closes, the operculum opens and the sides of the opercular cavity
move inwards. All of these actions increase the pressure in the opercular cavity
and force water over the gills and out of the operculum. The floor of the buccal
cavity is steadily moved up, maintaining a flow of water over the gills.
A Figure 5 Although this diagram shows the ventilation of the gills in stages, this
is actually a continuous process, which ensures that water is constantly flowing
over the gills
Effective gaseous exchange in water
Gills have a large surface area for diffusion, a rich blood supply to
maintain steep concentration gradients for diffusion, and thin layers so
that diffusing substances have only short distances to travel. Gills have
two extra adaptations that help to ensure the most effective possible
gaseous exchange occurs in the water:
The tips of adjacent gill filaments overlap. This increases the
resistance to the flow of water over the gill surfaces and slows
down the movement of the water. As a result there is more time
for gaseous exchange to take place.
The water moving over the gills and the blood in the gill
filaments flow in different directions. A steep concentration
gradient is needed for fast, efficient diffusion to take place.
Because the blood and water flow in opposite directions, a
countercurrent exchange system is set up. This adaptation
ensures that steeper concentration gradients are maintained
than if blood and water flowed in the same direction (known as
a parallel system). As a result, more gaseous exchange can take
place. The bony fish, with their countercurrent systems, remove
about 80% of the oxygen from the water flowing over them.
The cartilaginous fish have parallel systems and can only extract
about 50% of the oxygen from the water flowing over them
(Figure 6).
A Figure 6 Careful dissection of a
trout (genera Onchorhynchus). The
operculum (top) helps to protect the
gills. Removal of the operculum shows
thin feathery gills which have a large
surface area (middle). Here you can
see that the water flows in through the
mouth over the gills and out (bottom)
169
EXCHANGE SURFACES AND BREATHING
B Worked example: SA:V ratios
Compare the SA:V ratios of organisms with a radius of 1, 3 and
10 arbitrary units (au) and explain how this affects their ability to
exchange materials with the environment.
The surface area of a sphere is calculated using the formula 4^r2
The volume of a sphere is calculated using the equation
radius )
A Figure 2 The radius of a sphere
To do these calculations you use 3.14 as the value of it.
Example 1: Radius = lau
Surface area is 4nr2 so: 4 x 3.14 x 1x1 = 12.6 (1dp)
(4 x 3.14 xl xl xl)
Volume is ar’ so: 64
= 4.2 (dp)
SA:V ratio is 2,6 = 3:1
Example 2: Radius = 3 au
Surface area is 4rrºso: 4 x 3.14 x 3 x 3 = 113.0 (1dp)
(4 x 3.14 x 3 x 3 x 3) = 113.0 (1dp)
Volume is nr? so: 64
SA:V ratio is 113.0 = 1:1
113.0
Example 3: Radius = 10 au
Surface area is 4ar? so: 4 x 3.14 x 10 x 10 = 1256.0 (10p)
(4 x 3.14 x 10 x 10 x 10) = 4186.7 (1dp)
Volume is arº so: 14
1256
SA:V ratio is
4186
3 (to the nearest whole number)
The bigger the organism, the smaller the surface area to volume
ratio becomes, and the distances that substances need to travel
from the outside to reach the cells at the centre of the body get
longer. This makes it harder and ultimately impossible to absorb
enough oxygen through the available surface area to meet the
needs of the body.
Synoptic link
You will apply the same principles
of SA:Vratio when you consider
how nutrients are supplied to the
cells of multicellular organisms
in Chapter 8, Transport in animals
and Chapter 9, Transport in plants.
You will also consider SA:V ratio
when looking at adaptations
to reduce or increase heat
loss in Topics 15.2 and 15.3,
Thermoregulation in ectotherms
and endotherms, respectively.
155
7.1 Specialised exchange surfaces
e
e
Specialised exchange surfaces
Large, multicellular organisms have evolved specialised systems for
the exchange of the substances they need and the substances they
must remove.
All effective exchange surfaces have certain features in common.
You will be looking at many of them in detail in this chapter. Here is a
summary of the characteristic features of effective exchange surfaces,
along with some examples:
Figure 3 This scanning electron
micrograph shows the large surface area
of the gills of a fish, x 200 magnification
Increased surface area - provides the area needed for exchange
and overcomes the limitations of the SA:V ratio of larger organisms.
Examples include root hair cells in plants and the villi in the small
intestine of mammals.
Thin layers - these mean the distances that substances have to
diffuse are short, making the process fast and efficient. Examples
include the alveoli in the lungs (see next topic) and the villi of the
small intestine.
Good blood supply - the steeper the concentration gradient, the
faster diffusion takes place. Having a good blood supply ensures
substances are constantly delivered to and removed from the
exchange surface. This maintains a steep concentration gradient
for diffusion. For example the alveoli of the lungs, the gills of a
fish and the villi of the small intestine.
Ventilation to maintain diffusion gradient - for gases, a
ventilation system also helps maintain concentration gradients
and makes the process more efficient, for example the alveoli and
the gills of a fish where ventilation means a flow of water carrying
dissolved gases (see Topic 7.4, Ventilation and gas exchange in
other organisms).
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
specialised exchange surfaces in
many other topics. More detail on
the increased surface area of root
hair cells in plants and the villi in
the small intestine can be found
in Topic 9.2, Water transport in
multicellular animals and Topic
8.3, Blood, tissue fluid, and lymph
respectively.
Summary questions
1 Explain why single-celled organisms do not need specialised
exchange surfaces.
(4 marks)
2 Describe the main features of any efficient exchange surface
and explain how the structures relate to their functions.
(6 marks)
3 One roughly spherical organism has a radius of 2 au. Another
has a radius of 6 au. Compare the SA:V ratios of the organisms
and use these to explain why the larger organisms need
specialised exchange surfaces.
(6 marks)
156
7.4 Ventilation and gas exchange in other organisms
flow of blood in gills
blood leaving gills
-
therefore no
further net diffusion
diffusion
equilibrium
• arbitrary unit
of oxygen
direction of water flow
parallel system: blood in the gills and water flowing over the gills travel in the same direction, which
gives an initial steep oxygen concentration gradient between blood and water. Diffusion takes place
until the oxygen concentration of the blood and water are in equilibrium, then no net movement of
oxygen into the blood occurs,
► flow of blood in gills
blood leaving gills
diffusion
diffusion
diffusion
- direction of water flow
countercurrent system: blood and water flow in opposite directions so an oxygen concentration
gradient between the water and the blood is maintained all along the gill. Oxygen continues to diffuse
down the concentration gradient so a much higher level of oxygen saturation of the blood is achieved.
A Figure 7 The advantages of a countercurrent exchange system are clear to see. The system also
enables bony fish to remove more carbon dioxide from the blood than a parallel system
9 Dissecting, examining, and drawing gaseous exchange systems
Dissecting an animal gives you a unique insight into the observe and display the relevant features of an organism
complexity of a multicellular living organism. The process to the best of your ability, and then record what you
of evolution over millions of years has resulted in internal have seen in a clear and well-labelled diagram. It may
systems of great efficiency and elegance.
be useful to take a photograph of your dissection and
When you dissect an animal it can be confusing. You will be
so preserve what it actually looked like alongside your
labelled diagram. In Figure 3 and Figure 6 you can see
looking at one particular body system but they do not exist
in isolation. You cannot see the gas exchange system, for
examples of dissections of the gas exchange system of
an insect and the gas exchange system of a bony fish.
example, without getting through the body wall.
You will need specialist equipment including boards and
pins with which to display your dissection. The tools
needed for successful dissections include sharp scissors
and scalpels along with tweezers and mounted needles
to lift and tease out tissues.
When you carry out a dissection the aim is to be as
precise and clean in your work as possible. You should
1 Drawings from dissections are always done in
pencil - suggest why.
2 Make careful labelled drawings of the dissections
shown in Figure 3 and Figure 6.
The histology of exchange surfaces
adaptations of these surfaces for their role in gaseous
exchange.
Some of the key features of exchange surfaces - the
large surface area, the short diffusion distances, and the
proximity of the blood supply often cannot be seen when
you look at the whole organ system.
Example 1 - The network of tiny air sacs with walls that
are a single cell thick that make up the surface area
of the alveoli can clearly be seen in light micrographs of
lung tissue , x 40 magnification.
However using prepared slides with the light
microscope can give you an insight into the detailed
170
7.4 Ventilation and gas exchange in other organisms
body of the insect. The tubes are lined by
spirals of chitin, which keep them open
if they are bent or pressed. Chitin is the
material that makes up the cuticle. It is
relatively impermeable to gases and so little
gaseous exchange takes place in the trachea.
The tracheae branch to form narrower
tubes until they divide into the tracheoles,
minute tubes of diameter 0.6-0.8 um. Each
tracheole is a single, greatly elongated cell
with no chitin lining so they are freely
permeable to gases. Because of their very
small size they spread throughout the tissues
of the insect, running between individual
cells. This is where most of the gaseous
Figure 3 Careful dissection of an insect such as this immature
exchange takes place between the air and
desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria) can show the network of tracheae
the respiring cells.
which spread out from the spiracles. Here the locust dissection has
been submerged in water to help show the tracheae which are filled with In most insects, for most of the time, air
air and appear a pearly white. Very fine tracheae can be seen floating up moves along the tracheae and tracheoles
into the water
by diffusion alone, reaching all the tissues.
The vast numbers of tiny tracheoles give a very large surface area for
gaseous exchange. Oxygen dissolves in moisture on the walls of the
tracheoles and diffuses into the surrounding cells. Towards the end of
the tracheoles there is tracheal fluid, which limits the penetration
of air for diffusion. However, when oxygen demands build up - when
the insect is flying, for example - a lactic acid build up in the tissues
results in water moving out of the tracheoles by osmosis. This exposes
more surface area for gaseous exchange.
All of the oxygen needed by the cells of an insect is supplied to them
by the tracheal system.
The extent of gas exchange in most insects is controlled by the
opening and closing of the spiracles.
Some insects, for example larger beetles, locusts and grasshoppers,
bees, wasps and flies, have very high energy demands. To supply the
extra oxygen they need, these insects have alternative methods of
increasing the level of gaseous exchange. These include:
mechanical ventilation of the tracheal system - air is actively
pumped into the system by muscular pumping movements of the
thorax and/or the abdomen. These movements change the volume
of the body and this changes the pressure in the tracheae and
tracheoles. Air is drawn into the tracheae and tracheoles, or forced
out, as the pressure changes
collapsible enlarged tracheae or air sacs, which act as air
reservoirs - these are used to increase the amount of air moved
through the gas exchange system. They are usually inflated and
deflated by the ventilating movements of the thorax and abdomen.
166
7
7.2 The mammalian gaseous exchange system
house in the UK is only 67m2. If the lungs were simple, balloon-like
structures, the surface area would not be big enough for the amount
of oxygen needed to diffuse into the body. This demonstrates again
the importance of the SA:V ratio (Topic 7.1, Specialised exchange
surfaces).
Thin layers - both the alveoli and the capillaries that surround
them have walls that are only a single epithelial cell thick, so the
diffusion distances between the air in the alveolus and the blood in
the capillaries are very short.
Good blood supply - the millions of alveoli in cach lung are
supplied by a network of around 280 million capillaries. The
constant flow of blood through these capillaries brings carbon
dioxide and carries off oxygen, maintaining a steep concentration
gradient for both carbon dioxide and oxygen between the air in
the alveoli and the blood in the capillaries.
Good ventilation - breathing moves air in and out of the alveoli,
helping maintain steep diffusion gradients for oxygen and carbon
dioxide between the blood and the air in the lungs.
The inner surface of the alveoli is covered in a thin layer of a solution
of water, salts and lung surfactant. It is this surfactant that makes
it possible for the alveoli to remain inflated. Oxygen dissolves in the
water before diffusing into the blood, but water can also evaporate
into the air in the alveoli. Several of the adaptations of the human gas
exchange system are to reduce this loss of water.
Ventilating the lungs
Air is moved in and out of the lungs as a result of pressure changes in
the thorax (chest cavity) brought about by the breathing movements.
This movement of air is called ventilation.
trachea
lung
MICOS
rib
The rib cage provides a semi-rigid case
within which pressure can be lowered
with respect to the air outside it. The
diaphragm is a broad, domed sheet
of muscle, which forms the floor of
the thorax. The external intercostal
muscles and the internal intercostal
muscles are found between the ribs.
internal intercostal
muscles (towards The thorax is lined by the pleural
the inside)
membranes, which surround the lungs.
The space between them, the pleural
cavity, is usually filled with a thin layer
external intercostal of lubricating fluid so the membranes
muscles (towards slide easily over each other as you
the outside)
breathe.
heart
diaphragm
Inspiration
Inspiration (taking air in or inhalation)
is an energy-using process.
A Figure 5 The arrangement of the rib cage, diaphragm, and intercostal muscles
160
EXCHANGE SURFACES AND BREATHING
Bronchus
In the chest cavity the trachea divides to form the left bronchus
(plural bronchi), leading to the left lung, and the right bronchus
leading to the right lung. They are similar in structure to the trachea,
with the same supporting rings of cartilage, but they are smaller.
Synoptic link
You learnt about specialised
epithelial cells in Topic 6.4, The
organisation and specialisation
of cells.
Synoptic link
Bronchioles
In the lungs the bronchi divide to form many small bronchioles.
The smaller bronchioles (diameter 1 mm or less) have no cartilage
rings. The walls of the bronchioles contain smooth muscle. When
the smooth muscle contracts, the bronchioles constrict (close up).
When it relaxes, the bronchioles dilate (open up). This changes the
amount of air reaching the lungs. Bronchioles are lined with a thin
layer of flattened epithelium, making some gaseous exchange possible.
You learnt about collagen and
elastin in Topic 3.6, Structure of
proteins.
Alveoli
The alveoli (singular alveolus) are tiny air sacs, which are the main gas
exchange surfaces of the body. Alveoli are unique to mammalian lungs.
Each alveolus has a diameter of around 200–300 um and consists of a
layer of thin, flattened epithelial cells, along with some collagen and
elastic fibres (composed of elastin). These elastic tissues allow the alveoli
to stretch as air is drawn in. When they return to their resting size, they
help squeeze the air out. This is known as the elastic recoil of the lungs.
exhaled air
inhaled air
cavity of alveolus
high carbon dioxide concentration
low oxygen concentration
alveolar
duct
epithelial cell
of alveolus
moist alveolar
surface
+low CO2 concentration
high O2 concentration
endothelial
cell of
capillary
red blood cell
compressed against
capillary wall
blood plasma
pulmonary
capillary
Figure 4 The single cell walls of the alveoli and the
capillaries (containing red blood cells) that make up
the structure of the lung can be seen clearly in this light
micrograph, x60 magnification
Figure 3 Gaseous exchange in an alveolus
The main adaptations of the alveoli for effective gaseous
exchange include:
Large surface area - there are 300-500 million alveoli per adult
lung. The alveolar surface area for gaseous exchange in the two lungs
combined is around 50-75m². The average floor area of a 4-bedroom
Synoptic link
You learnt about cell membranes
and how they are freely permeable
to gases such as oxygen and carbon
dioxide in Topic 5.3, Diffusion.
159
7.4 Ventilation and gas
exchange in other organisms
Specification reference: 3.1.1
Internal gas-exchange systems such as the lungs in mammals are not
the only way for multicellular organisms to get the oxygen needed
by the cells. The gaseous exchange systems of insects are effective
but very different, yet they have many key features in common with
mammalian systems.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the mechanisms of ventilation
and gas exchange in insects
→ the mechanisms of ventilation
and gas exchange in bony fish
the dissection, examination
and drawing of a bony fish
and insect trachea
the examination of microscope
slides to show histology of
exchange surfaces.
Gaseous exchange systems in insects
Many insects are very active during parts of their life cycles.
They are mainly land-dwelling animals with relatively high oxygen
requirements. However, they
have a tough exoskeleton
through which little or no gaseous
exchange can take place. They do
not usually have blood pigments
that can carry oxygen. They need
a different way of exchanging
gases. The gaseous exchange
muscle
system of insects has evolved
to deliver the oxygen directly to
the cells and to remove the
carbon dioxide in the same way
(Figure 1).
tracheoles
water in the
How does gas exchange take
tracheoles
tracheae
place in insects?
Along the thorax and abdomen
spiracle
of most insects are small openings
known as spiracles. Air enters
and leaves the system through the figure 1 The gaseous exchange
spiracles, but water is also lost. system in an insect
Just like mammals, insects need
to maximise the efficiency of gaseous exchange, but minimise the
loss of water. In many insects the spiracles can be opened or closed by
sphincters. The spiracle sphincters are kept closed as much as possible
to minimise water loss.
loss of mass / mg day-1
When an insect is inactive and oxygen demands are very low,
the spiracles will all be closed most of the time. When the oxygen
demand is raised or the carbon dioxide levels build up, more of the
spiracles open.
i'2'3'4'5'6'
day
A Figure 2 The effect of spiracle
opening on water loss in the blood-
sucking bug Rhodnius (top). The insect
was kept in dry air for 6 days. It was
not fed, to keep it relatively inactive. On
day 3 carbon dioxide levels were raised,
which resulted in the spiracles opening.
The air was returned to normal on day 4
Leading away from the spiracles are the tracheae. These are the
largest tubes of the insect respiratory system, up to 1mm in diameter,
and they carry air into the body. They run both into and along the
165
7.2 The mammalian gaseous
exchange system
Specification reference: 3.1.1
Animals that live on the land face a continual conflict between
the need for gaseous exchange and the need for water. Gaseous
exchange surfaces are moist, so oxygen dissolves in the water before
diffusing into the body tissues. As a result the conditions needed
to take in oxygen successfully are also ideal for the evaporation of
water. Mammals have evolved complex systems that allow them
to exchange gases efficiently but minimise the amount of water
lost from the body. You are going to look at the human gaseous
exchange system as an example of the specialised systems common
to all mammals.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the structures and functions
of the components of
mammalian gaseous
exchange system
→ the mechanism of ventilation
in mammals.
The human gaseous exchange system
Mammals are relatively big - they have a small SA:V ratio and a very
large volume of cells. They also have a high metabolic rate because
they are active and maintain their body temperature independent
of the environment. As a result they need lots of oxygen for cellular
respiration and they produce carbon dioxide, which needs to be
removed. This exchange of gases takes place in the lungs.
nasal cavity
deoxygenated blood
oxygenated blood
nostril
mouth
larynx
trachea
intercostal
muscles
bronchus
– bronchiole
pleural
membrane
bronchioles
>
ribs
alveoli
diaphragm
abdominal cavity
Figure 1 The structure of the human gaseous exchange system
157
7.3 Measuring the process
Specification reference: 3.1.1
The amount of gaseous exchange that needs to take place in your lungs
will vary a lot depending on your size and level of activity. The gaseous
exchange system has to be able to respond to the differing demands of
your body.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the relationship between
vital capacity, tidal volume,
breathing rate and
oxygen uptake.
Measuring the capacity of the lungs
The volume of air that is drawn in and out of the lungs can be measured
in a variety of different ways:
A peak flow meter (Figure 1) is a simple device that measures the
rate at which air can be expelled from the lungs. People who have
asthma often use these to monitor how well their lungs are working.
Vitalographs are more sophisticated versions of the peak flow
meter. The patient being tested breathes out as quickly as they can
through a mouthpiece, and the instrument produces a graph of the
amount of air they breathe out and how quickly it is breathed out.
This volume of air is called the forced expiratory volume in
1 second.
A spirometer is commonly used to measure different aspects
of the lung volume, or to investigate breathing patterns. There
are many different forms of the spirometer but they all use the
principle shown in Figure 2.
Components of the lung volume
There are several different aspects of the lung volume that can be
measured.
A Figure 1 Peak flow meters give a
useful quick measure of how much air
can be moved out of (and therefore into)
the lungs
airtight chamber
filled with oxygen
trace drawn on
revolving drum
as lid moves up
and down
counterpoise
canister of soda lime
to remove carbon
dioxide produced
nose clip
Tidal volume is the volume of air that
moves into and out of the lungs with
each resting breath. It is around 500 cm
in most adults at rest, which uses about
15% of the vital capacity of the lungs.
Vital capacity is the volume of air that
can be breathed in when the strongest
possible exhalation is followed by the
deepest possible intake of breath.
Inspiratory reserve volume is the
maximum volume of air you can breathe
in over and above a normal inhalation.
Expiratory reserve volume is the extra
amount of air you can force out of your
lungs over and above the normal tidal
volume of air you breathe out.
Residual volume is the volume of air
that is left in your lungs when you have
exhaled as hard as possible. This cannot be
measured directly.
water level
subject breathes
in and out until
oxygen used up
Figure 2 Spirometers can be used to measured the volumes of gas
breathed in and out under different conditions
163
7.3 Measuring the process
Total lung capacity is the
sum of the vital capacity and
the residual volume.
inspiratory
reserve
volume
inspiratory
capacity
vital
capacity
Recordings from a spirometer
show the different volumes of air
moved in and out of the lungs.
volume/dm3
-
-
- - - -
tidal volume
VAINEN
expiratory
reserve volume
tidal
volume increases
during exercise
Breathing rhythms
The pattern and volume of
breathing changes as the
demands of the body change.
The breathing rate is the number
of breaths taken per minute.
The ventilation rate is the
total volume of air inhaled in
one minute.
total
lung
capacity
residual
volume
0
+
ventilation rate = tidal volume x
A Figure 3 These volumes are averages taken from many individuals of different
breathing rate (per minute)
sexes, sizes, and levels of fitness
When the oxygen demands of the body increase, for example during
Worked example:
exercise, the tidal volume of air moved in and out of the lungs
with each breath can increase from 15% to as much as 50% of the
Breathing calculations
vital capacity. The breathing rate can also increase. In this way the
The normal tidal volume ventilation of the lungs and so the oxygen uptake during gaseous
of a male is 500 cm. His exchange can be increased to meet the demands of the tissues.
ventilation rate is 6 dm3
per minute. What is his
resting breathing rate?
ventilation rate = tidal
Summary questions
volume x breathing rate
(per minute)
1 Describe how you could investigate breathing rates in a
6 dm = 6000 cm
school laboratory.
(3 marks)
6000 = 500 x breathing rate
2 Describe the relationships between tidal volume, breathing
Breathing rate =
rate, and oxygen uptake.
(4 marks)
500
= 12 breaths
3 A dog is under stress during a visit to the vet and pants but the
per minute
ventilation rate remains steady. Suggest a possible explanation
• During physical exertion,
for these observations.
(2 marks)
his breathing rate goes up
to 20 breaths per minute
The normal breathing rate of a healthy 50 year old woman is 18 breaths
and the ventilation
per minute and her tidal volume is 500 cm".
rate to 15 dm'. What is
a During strenuous exercise her ventilation rate goes up to 45 000 cm
the new tidal volume?
per minute and she is breathing 30 times a minute. What is her tidal
volume during exercise and what increase is this over her normal
15 dm3 = 15000 cm
tidal volume?
(6 marks)
15 000 = tidal volume x 20
b She develops a chest infection and her breathing rate increases to
tidal volume =
- 15000
25 breaths per minute, but her tidal volume falls to 300. By what
20
percentage does her ventilation rate fall compared wirh her normal
= 750 cm
resting rate as a result of the infection?
(6 marks)
164
7
7.2 The mammalian gaseous exchange system
Key structures
Nasal cavity
The nasal cavity has a number of important features:
a large surface area with a good blood supply, which warms the air
to body temperature
a hairy lining, which secretes mucus to trap dust and bacteria,
protecting delicate lung tissue from irritation and infection
moist surfaces, which increase the humidity of the incoming air,
reducing evaporation from the exchange surfaces.
After passing through the nasal cavity, the air entering the lungs is a
similar temperature and humidity to the air already there.
Trachea
The trachea is the main airway carrying clean, warm, moist air
from the nose down into the chest. It is a wide tube supported by
incomplete rings of strong, flexible cartilage, which stop the trachea
from collapsing. The rings are incomplete so that food can move easily
down the oesophagus behind the trachea.
Synoptic link
You learnt about cilia in Topic 2.4,
Eukaryotic cell structure.
The trachea and its branches are lined with a ciliated epithelium,
with goblet cells between and below the epithelial cells (Figure 2).
Goblet cells secrete mucus onto the lining of the trachea, to trap
dust and microorganisms that have escaped the nose lining. The
cilia beat and move the mucus, along with any trapped dirt and
microorganisms, away from the lungs. Most of it goes into the
throat and is swallowed and digested. One of the effects of cigarette
smoke is that it stops these cilia beating.
goblet
cells
cilia
goblet cells
ciliated
epithelium
mucus
cilia
lo Doble
doel
ciliated
epithelial
cells
A Figure 2 Left: A light micrograph and. Right: a diagrammatic representation of a
section through the lining of a trachea. The lining consists of mucus-secreting goblet
cells and ciliated epithelial cells, x 300 magnification
158
EXCHANGE SURFACES AND BREATHING
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
--
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
--
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
--
-
-
-
-
-
The diagram below shows the lung volumes
at different phases of the respiratory cycle.
6000
5500
5000
4500
34000
3500
3000
lung volume (ml)
-------------
2500-WWW WWW
2000
1500-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
-
1000
500
OL
a Calculate, using the diagram, the
inspiratory reserve volume and tidal
volume of the lungs.
(2 marks)
b Copy the diagram and indicate the
residual volume and expiratory reserve
volume.
(2 marks)
c The diagram below compares the lung
volumes of a woman before and during
pregnancy.
4200
4200
4000-
4000-
3800
3800
3600
3600
3400 -
3400
3200 -
3200 -
3000-
3000 -
2800
2800 -
3 2600
2600 -
2400
E 2400
2200
2 2200
2000
1800
20 1800
1600
1600-
1400
1400-
1200
1200
1000
1000
800-
800-
600
600-
400-
400 -
200
200+
lung volume (ml)
2000
lung volume (ml)
0
before pregnancy
full term pregnancy
Describe the changes in lung volumes that
occur during pregnancy and explain the
reasons for these changes. (6 marks)
173
EXCHANGE SURFACES AND BREATHING
The dome-shaped diaphragm contracts, flattening, and lowering.
The external intercostal muscles contract, moving the ribs upwards
and outwards. The volume of the thorax increases so the pressure
in the thorax is reduced. It is now lower than the pressure of the
atmospheric air, so air is drawn through the nasal passages, trachea,
bronchi, and bronchioles into the lungs. This equalises the pressures
inside and outside the chest.
Expiration
Normal expiration (breathing out or
exhalation) is a passive process.
inspiration
vertebral
column
ribs
ribs
diaphragm
The muscles of the diaphragm relax so it
moves up into its resting domed shape.
The external intercostal muscles relax so
the ribs move down and inwards under
gravity. The elastic fibres in the alveoli of
the lungs return to their normal length.
The effect of all these changes is to decrease
the volume of the thorax. Now the
pressure inside the thorax is greater than
the pressure of the atmospheric air, so air
moves out of the lungs until the pressure
inside and out is equal again.
expiration
You can exhale forcibly using energy.
The internal intercostal muscles contract,
pulling the ribs down hard and fast, and
the abdominal muscles contract forcing the
diaphragm up to increase the pressure in
the lungs rapidly.
air movement
►ribcage movement
► diaphragm movement
A Figure 6 Ventilation of the lungs
There are two main ways of treating asthma:
Attacking asthma
5.4 million people in the UK are currently being treated
for asthma. They have airways that are sensitive to
everyday triggers including house dust mites, cigarette
smoke, pollen, and stress.
Relievers give immediate relief from the symptoms.
They are chemicals similar to the hormone adrenaline.
They attach to active sites on the surface membranes
of smooth muscle cells in the bronchioles, making them
relax and dilating the airways.
During an asthma attack, the cells lining the bronchioles
release histamines, chemicals that make the epithelial
cells become inflamed and swollen. Histamines
stimulate the goblet cells to make excess mucus, and
the smooth muscle in the bronchiole walls to contract.
As a result, the airways narrow and fill with mucus,
making it difficult to breathe.
Preventers are often steroids, which are taken every day
to reduce the sensitivity of the lining of the airways.
Asthma medicines have been developed to reduce the
symptoms and even prevent attacks. The drugs are
delivered straight into the breathing system using
an inhaler.
1 Explain how reliever medicines would overcome
the symptoms of an asthma attack.
2 Explain how steroids could reduce the likelihood of
an asthma attack.
161
7.2 The mammalian gaseous exchange system
The first breath
1 Discuss why the first breath taken is so much
harder than any subsequent breaths and outline
how artificial lung surfactants have improved
survival rates for premature babies.
The first breath a newborn baby takes needs a force
15-20 times greater than any normal inhalation to
inflate the lungs. The lungs are enormously stretched as
the air flows in, and the elastic tissue never returns to
its original length. This intake of breath is only possible
because of special chemicals called lung surfactants
containing phospholipids and both hydrophilic and
hydrophobic proteins. The surfactant stops the alveoli
collapsing and sticking together as the baby exhales.
Without it, the second breath would be as difficult as the
first, and continued breathing impossible.
Babies born at full term have alveoli coated in lung
surfactant all ready for breathing. However, the cells
of the alveoli do not produce enough surfactant for the
lungs to work properly until around the 30th week of
pregnancy. This is one reason why premature babies can
struggle to breathe and may die. In recent years artificial
lung surfactants have been produced. A tiny amount
sprayed into the lungs of a premature baby coats the
alveoli just like the natural surfactant, making breathing
easier, helping to prevent lung damage and enabling
many more babies to survive.
A Figure 7 The first breath a newborn takes is the hardest -
and without lung surfactant it would be impossible
Synoptic link
You learnt about phospholipids and proteins in
Chapter 2, Basic components of living systems.
Summary questions
1 Explain how the structures below are adapted to make gaseous
exchange as effective as possible.
à nose
(3 marks)
b trachea
(3 marks)
c bronchioles
(3 marks)
2 a Explain how the alveoli are adapted for gaseous exchange. (4 marks)
b In some diseases, the structure of the alveoli breaks down
to give much bigger air sacs. Explain (with example calculations)
how this reduces their effectiveness for gaseous exchange. (5 marks)
3 Smokers get more infections of the breathing system than
non-smokers. Suggest why.
(6 marks)
162
7
Chapter 7 Practice questions
Draw another line on the graph for a
man who had untreated asthma from
birth. Explain the reasons for the position
of your line and state why it would be
unlikely to see someone produce this line.
(3 marks)
d Explain why inhalation is an active
process but normal exhalation is a passive
process.
(3 marks)
Fick's law states that:
3
Practice questions
1 There are several different aspects of the lung
volume that can be measured.
Which of the following statements is/are
correct with respect to lung volumes?
Statement 1: tidal volume is the volume of
air which moves into and out of the lungs
with each resting breath
Statement 2: vital capacity is the maximum
amount of air you can breathe in over and
above a normal inhalation
Statement 3: inspiratory reserve volume is
the volume of air which can be breathed out
by the strongest possible exhalation followed
by the deepest possible intake of breath
A 1, 2 and 3 are correct
B Only 1 and 2 are correct
C Only 2 and 3 are correct
D Only 1 is correct
(1 mark)
2 a State what a peak flow meter is used to
measure
(2 marks)
b The chart below shows the range of
normal peak flow for both men and
women of different ages.
Area of diffusion Difference in
surface concentration
Rate of diffusion = -
Thickness of surface over which
diffusion takes place
4
height
700
190
men
women
a Explain how the human respiratory
system is designed to obey this law.
(3 marks)
b The gaseous exchange surfaces in fish and
mammals are designed to perform the
same function: the uptake of oxygen and
removal of carbon dioxide.
Discuss how they are each adapted
to carry out this function in different
environments; fish in water and
mammals in air.
(3 marks)
Insects have an exoskeleton.
a State the main component of this
exoskeleton.
(1 mark)
b The component named in a is a long-chain
polymer of a N-acetylglucosamine, a
derivative of glucose.
Explain what is meant by the term
polymer, with reference to this
component.
(2 marks)
Although relatively small, insects have a
high oxygen demand. The exoskeleton is
impermeable to oxygen.
Describe how insects are adapted to
ensure their tissues receive oxygen at a
sufficient rate.
(4 marks)
d Describe one similarity and one difference
between the trachea of a mammal and the
trachea of an insect.
(2 marks)
peak flow (litres/min)
175
160
69
63
60
152
cm
350+
20
30
40
70
80
50 60
age (yrs)
Using the graph, describe how lung
function varies with both age and gender.
(4 marks)
172
EXCHANGE SURFACES AND BREATHING
Example 3 - The structure of the gills in a bony fish
show clearly in a light micrograph, showing the delicate
structures and large surface area as well as the major
blood vessels , 278 magnification.
Example 2 - The delicate rings of chitin which
support the trachea in insects, holding them open
so that air can diffuse through them to the tracheoles
and the tissues themselves are revealed in this light
micrograph, x 37 magnification.
1 Make carefully labelled drawings of each of these
micrographs, using the skills you learned in
Chapter 2.
2 What are the advantages of using the light
microscope to look at these tissues?
OR
Summary questions
1 Suggest why a fish will die when it is left out of water for
too long
(2 marks)
Study tip
Make sure you are clear about
the key features of a successful
gaseous exchange surface and can
recognise those common features
in the gaseous exchange systems
of a variety of organisms.
2 Compile a table to compare the gaseous exchange systems of
a human, an insect and a bony fish.
(5 marks)
3 Explain how insects that have particularly high energy
requirements can increase the amount of gaseous exchange
taking place in their bodies.
(6 marks)
Explain how the structure of the gas exchange system of
a bony fish maximises the amount of oxygen that can be
taken from the water.
(6 marks)
171
