8.2 Blood vessels
Specification reference: 3.1.2
Circulation in humans is typical of a mammalian circulatory system.
It is estimated that if all the blood vessels of an average adult human
were laid end to end they would stretch to 100 000 miles - that is the
equivalent of about four times around the circumference of the Earth.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ The structure and functions of
arteries, arterioles, capillaries,
venules and veins.
There are several different types of blood vessels in the body and
their structural composition is closely related to their function. Some
examples of different components utilised in some blood vessels are:
Elastic fibres - these are composed
of elastin and can stretch and recoil,
providing vessel walls with flexibility.
Smooth muscle - contracts or relaxes,
which changes the size of the lumen
(the channel within the blood vessel).
Collagen - provides structural
support to maintain the shape and
volume of the vessel.
The sections below detail which
components are found in each of the
blood vessel types.
Arteries and arterioles
The arteries carry blood away from
the heart to the tissues of the body.
They carry oxygenated blood except
in the pulmonary artery, which carries
deoxygenated blood from the heart to
the lungs, and (during pregnancy) the
umbilical artery, which carries deoxygenated blood from the fetus to
the placenta. The blood in the arteries is under higher pressure than
the blood in the veins.
artery
lumen
endothelium
elastic layer
muscle layer
Artery walls contain elastic fibres, smooth muscle and collagen (Figure 1).
The elastic fibres enable them to withstand the force of the blood pumped
out of the heart and stretch (within limits maintained by collagen) to
take the larger blood volume. In between the contractions of the heart,
the elastic fibres recoil and return to their original length. This helps to
even out the surges of blood pumped from the heart to give a continuous
flow. However, you can still feel a pulse (surge of blood) when the heart
contracts, which the elastic fibres cannot completely eliminate. The lining
of an artery (endothelium) is smooth so the blood flows easily over it.
tough outer layer
(collagen)
Figure 1 The structure of the artery
wall is closely related to its functions,
and changes as the arteries get
smaller, x 250 magnification
Arterioles link the arteries and the capillaries. They have more
smooth muscle and less elastin in their walls than arteries, as they
have little pulse surge, but can constrict or dilate to control the flow of
blood into individual organs. When the smooth muscle in the arteriole
contracts it constricts the vessel and prevents blood flowing into a
178
8.3 Blood, tissue fluid, and lymph
been absorbed into the lymph from the villi of the small intestine. The
lymph capillaries join up to form larger vessels. The fluid is transported
through them by the squeezing of the body muscles. One-way valves
like those in veins prevent the backflow of lymph. Eventually the
lymph returns to the blood, flowing into the right and left subclavian
veins (under the clavicle, or collar bone).
Along the lymph vessels are the lymph nodes. Lymphocytes build up
in the lymph node when necessary and produce antibodies, which are
then passed into the blood. Lymph nodes also intercept bacteria and
other debris from the lymph, which are ingested by phagocytes found
in the nodes. The lymphatic system plays a major role in the defence
mechanisms of the body.
Enlarged lymph nodes are a sign that the body is fighting off an invading
pathogen. This is why doctors often examine the neck, armpits, stomach
or groin of their patients - these are the sites of some of the major
lymph nodes (which people often refer to as 'lymph glands').
lymph
lymphatic capillary
tissue fluid containing
carbon dioxide and
waste materials
blood
plasma
tissue fluid containing
oxygen and nutrients
ultrafiltration
reabsorption
arteriole
venule
return
of lymph
via
lymph
vessels
tissue
fluid
capillary
drainage
blood from
heart
blood to
heart
lymph
artery
vein
A Figure 4 The human lymphatic system
Summary questions
1 Describe the main functions of the blood.
2 a What are platelets?
b What is the role of platelets in the body?
c What percentage of the cells/cell fragments in
the blood is made up of platelets?
(4 marks)
(3 marks)
(3 marks)
(3 marks)
3 Summarise the similarities and differences between
plasma, tissue fluid, and lymph.
(5 marks)
4 Explain how hydrostatic and oncotic pressure affect the
movement of fluids into and out of capillaries.
(6 marks)
184
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
Synoptic link
Tissue fluid
The substances dissolved in plasma can pass through the fenestrations
in the capillary walls, with the exception of the large plasma
proteins. The plasma proteins, particularly albumin, have an osmotic
effect. They give the blood in the capillaries a relatively high solute
potential (and so a relatively low water potential) compared with the
surrounding fluid. As a result, water has a tendency to move into
the blood in the capillaries from the surrounding fluid by osmosis.
The tendency of water to move into the blood by osmosis is termed
oncotic pressure and it is about -3.3 kPa.
You will learn about temperature
control in endotherms and
ectotherms and about excretion
in Chapter 15, Homeostasis. You
will learn about hormones in Topic
14.1, Hormonal communication.
However, as blood flows through the arterioles into the capillaries, it is
still under pressure from the surge of blood that occurs every time the
heart contracts. This is hydrostatic pressure. At the arterial end of
the capillary, the hydrostatic pressure forcing fluid out of the capillaries
is relatively high at about 4.6 kPa (Figure 3). It is higher than the
oncotic pressure attracting water in by osmosis, so fluid is squeezed
out of the capillaries. This fluid fills the spaces between the cells and
is called tissue fluid. Tissue fluid has the same composition as the
plasma, without the red blood cells and the plasma proteins. Diffusion
takes place between the blood and the cells through the tissue fluid.
Synoptic link
You learnt about hydrostatic
pressure and osmosis in Topic 5.5,
Osmosis.
Study tip
As the blood moves through the capillaries towards the venous
system, the balance of forces changes. The hydrostatic pressure falls
to around 2.3 kPa in the vessels as fluid has moved out and the pulse
is completely lost. The oncotic pressure is still -3.3 kPa, so it is now
stronger than the hydrostatic pressure, so water moves back into
the capillaries by osmosis as it approaches the venous end of the
capillaries. By the time the blood returns to the veins, 90% of the
tissue fluid is back in the blood vessels.
Filtration pressure = hydrostatic
pressure - oncotic pressure
arterial end:
high hydrostatic pressure of 4.6 kPa
4.6 -3.3 = 1.3 kPa
... net flow of fluid out of capillary
to form tissue fluid
venous end:
low hydrostatic pressure of 2.3 kPa
2.3-3.3=-1.0 kPa
... net flow of fluid back into capillary
oncotic pressure of blood
tissue fluid
oncotic pressure
of blood -3.3 kPa
capillary
A Figure 3 Diagram showing differences in hydrostatic pressure at arterial and
venous end and how this results in movement into or out of the capillary
Lymph
Some of the tissue fluid does not return to the capillaries. 10% of
the liquid that leaves the blood vessels drains into a system of blind-
ended tubes called lymph capillaries, where it is known as lymph.
Lymph is similar in composition to plasma and tissue fluid but has less
oxygen and fewer nutrients. It also contains fatty acids, which have
183
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
Blood is pumped from the heart to the lungs to pick up oxygen
and unload carbon dioxide, and then returns to the heart.
Blood flows through the heart and is pumped out to travel all
around the body before returning to the heart again.
lungs
pulmonary
circulation
heart
systemic circulation
other
organs
Figure 5 The double closed
circulatory system of a mammal
So in a double circulatory system, the blood travels twice through
the heart for each circuit of the body. Each circuit - to the lungs and to
the body - only passes through one capillary network, which means a
relatively high pressure and fast flow of blood can be maintained.
Summary questions
(3 marks)
1 Describe the function of a circulatory system.
2 Explain why circulatory systems are found in multicellular
organisms but not unicellular organisms.
(2 marks)
3 Compare open and closed circulatory systems.
(6 marks)
Land predators such as foxes have a double closed circulatory
system. Aquatic predators such as pike are effective with
a single closed circulatory system. Explain why these two
types of predator have different circulatory systems. (6 marks)
Study tip
Make sure you are clear about the
differences between open and
closed circulatory systems, and
between single and double closed
circulatory systems.
Be aware of the advantages
and disadvantages of the
different systems.
177
8.4 Transport of oxygen and
carbon dioxide in the blood
Specification reference: 3.1.2
The most specialised transport role of the blood is the transport of
oxygen from the lungs to the cells of the body by the erythrocytes
(red blood cells). The erythrocytes are also involved in the removal
of carbon dioxide from the cells and its transport to the lungs for
gaseous exchange.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the role of haemoglobin in
transporting oxygen and
carbon dioxide
the oxygen dissociation
curve for fetal and adult
haemoglobin.
Transporting oxygen
The erythrocytes are very specialised, with a number of adaptations to
their main function of transporting oxygen.
Erythrocytes have a biconcave shape. This shape has a larger surface
area than a simple disc structure or a sphere, increasing the surface
area available for diffusion of gases. It also helps them to pass through
narrow capillaries. In adults, erythrocytes are formed continuously
in the red bone marrow. By the time mature erythrocytes enter the
circulation they have lost their nuclei, which maximises the amount of
haemoglobin that fits into the cells. It also limits their life,
so they only last for about 120 days in the bloodstream.
Erythrocytes contain haemoglobin, the red pigment that carries
oxygen and also gives them their colour. Haemoglobin is a very large
globular conjugated protein made up of four peptide chains, each
with an iron-containing haem prosthetic group. There are about
300 million haemoglobin molecules in each red blood cell and each
haemoglobin molecule can bind to four oxygen molecules.
The oxygen binds quite loosely to the haemoglobin forming
oxyhaemoglobin. The reaction is reversible.
Hb + 40 5 Hb(04
haemoglobin + oxygen = oxyhaemoglobin
Carrying oxygen
When the erythrocytes enter the capillaries in the lungs, the oxygen
levels in the cells are relatively low. This makes a steep concentration
gradient between the inside of the erythrocytes and the air in the
alveoli. Oxygen moves into the erythrocytes and binds with the
haemoglobin. The arrangement of the haemoglobin molecule
means that as soon as one oxygen molecule binds to a haem group,
the molecule changes shape, making it easier for the next oxygen
molecules to bind. This is known as positive cooperativity. Because the
oxygen is bound to the haemoglobin, the free oxygen concentration in
the erythrocyte stays low, so a steep diffusion gradient is maintained
until all of the haemoglobin is saturated with oxygen.
Synoptic link
You learnt about haemoglobin as
a globular conjugated protein in
Topic 3.7, Types of proteins.
When the blood reaches the body tissues, the situation is reversed.
The concentration of oxygen in the cytoplasm of the body cells
185
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
capillary bed. This is vasoconstriction. When the smooth muscle in
the wall of an arteriole relaxes, blood flows through into the capillary
bed. This is vasodilation.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the structure of
elastin and collagen in Topic 3.6
The structure of proteins.
aorta
medium-
sized artery
arteriole
2.5 cm
0.4 cm
relative
proportions of:
30 um
elastin fibres
smooth muscle
collagen
A Figure 2 The differing proportions of components of the
artery wall depending on how far the artery is from the heart
and thus its role in the body
Collagen, elastin, and aortic aneurysms
An aneurysm is a bulge or weakness in a blood vessel. The most common
places for aneurysms are in the aorta and in the arteries of the brain. Most
people do not know they have an aneurysm until it bursts. This is very serious
and can be fatal. High blood pressure is one factor that increases the risk
of an aneurysm. However, scientists have also discovered changes in the
proportion of collagen to elastin in the aorta wall. The ratio of collagen: elastin
in a normal aorta is 1.85: 1. In a small aneurysm it increases to around 3.75:1
and in large aortic aneurysms it is 7.91:1. Research is continuing to see if this
apparent link is real - and, if so, whether it can be used to predict who is at
risk so they can have regular aortic screening.
red blood cell
1 What hypothesis for the formation of aneurysms can you develop
from these data?
2 Suggest two possible ways in which patients might be treated to
reduce the possibility of aneurysms developing or enlarging.
capillary
10um
7-8
um
lumen
capillary wall -
Capillaries
The capillaries are microscopic blood vessels that link the arterioles
with the venules. They form an extensive network through all
the tissues of the body. The lumen of a capillary is so small that red
blood cells (which have a diameter of only 7.5-8 um) have to travel
through in single file (Figure 3). Substances are exchanged through
the capillary walls between the tissue cells and the blood. The gaps
between the endothelial cells that make up the capillary walls in most
areas of the body are relatively large. This is where many substances
pass out of the capillaries into the fluid surrounding the cells. The
exception is the capillaries in the central nervous system, which have
very tight junctions between the cells.
A Figure 3 The structure of capillaries
means that they are small enough to
form the immense networks needed to
exchange substances between the blood
and the tissues
179
8.2 Blood vessels
In most organs of the body the blood entering the capillaries from
the arterioles is oxygenated. By the time it leaves the capillaries
for the venules it has less oxygen and more carbon dioxide (it is
deoxygenated). Again, the lungs and the placenta are the exceptions,
with deoxygenated blood entering the capillaries and oxygenated
blood leaving in the venules.
Ways in which capillaries are adapted for their role:
They provide a very large surface area for the diffusion of substances
into and out of the blood.
The total cross-sectional area of the capillaries is always greater
than the arteriole supplying them so the rate of blood flow falls.
The relatively slow movement of blood through capillaries gives
more time for the exchange of materials by diffusion between the
blood and the cells.
The walls are a single endothelial cell thick, giving a very thin
layer for diffusion.
Veins and venules
The veins carry blood away from the cells
of the body towards the heart and, with two
exceptions, they carry deoxygenated blood.
The pulmonary vein carries oxygenated
blood from the lungs to the heart, and
(during pregnancy) the umbilical vein
carries oxygenated blood from the placenta
to the fetus.
Deoxygenated blood flows from the capillaries
into very small veins celled venules and then
into larger veins. Finally it reaches the two
main vessels carrying deoxygenated blood
back to the heart - the inferior vena cava
from the lower parts of the body and the superior vena cava from
the head and upper body.
endothelium
elastic layer
Veins do not have a pulse – the surges from the heart pumping are lost
as the blood passes through the narrow capillaries. However, they do
hold a large reservoir of blood - up to 60% of your blood volume is in
your veins at any one time.
muscle layer
tough outer layer
(collagen)
The blood pressure in the veins is very low compared with the pressure
in the arteries. Medium-sized veins (the majority of the venous
system) have valves to prevent the backflow of blood (see next page).
The walls contain lots of collagen and relatively little elastic fibre, and
the vessels have a wide lumen and a smooth, thin lining (known as
the endothelium) so the blood flows easily (Figure 4).
Figure 4 Veins do not have to
withstand high pressures like arteries do
but they need a big capacity and this is
reflected in their structure
Venules link the capillaries with the veins. They have very thin walls
with just a little smooth muscle. Several venules join to form a vein.
180
8.4 Transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood
Study tip
is lower than in the erythrocytes. As a result, oxygen moves out
of the erythrocytes down a concentration gradient. Once the first
oxygen molecule is released by the haemoglobin, the molecule again
changes shape and it becomes easier to remove the remaining oxygen
molecules.
Partial pressure is a useful way of
talking about the concentration
of a chemical when it is one of
a mixture of gases. The whole
mixture of gases has an overall
pressure and each of the
chemicals in the mixture can be
thought of as contributing part
of that pressure. If you were shut
in an airtight room, as time went
by the overall pressure of the air
around you would not change but
the partial pressure of oxygen
(po,) would fall, and the partial
pressure of carbon dioxide would
rise (the partial pressure of
nitrogen would not change). If you
walk up a mountain the overall
pressure of the air does decrease
as the altitude increases. In
this case the partial pressures
of oxygen, carbon dioxide and
nitrogen are all falling (but the
proportions of each are not
changing).
An oxygen dissociation curve (Figure 1) is an important tool
for understanding how the blood carries and releases oxygen. The
percentage saturation haemoglobin in the blood is plotted against
the partial pressure of oxygen (po). Oxygen dissociation curves
show the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen. A very small change
in the partial pressure of oxygen in the surroundings makes a
significant difference to the saturation of the haemoglobin with
oxygen, because once the first molecule becomes attached, the
change in the shape of the haemoglobin molecule means other
oxygen molecules are added rapidly. The curve levels out at the
highest partial pressures of oxygen because all the haem groups are
bound to oxygen and so the haemoglobin is saturated and cannot
take up any more.
This means that at the high partial pressure of oxygen in the lungs
the haemoglobin in the red blood cells is rapidly loaded with oxygen.
Equally, a relatively small drop in oxygen levels in the respiring tissues
means oxygen is released rapidly from the haemoglobin to diffuse into
the cells. This effect is enhanced by the relatively low pH in the tissues
compared with the lungs.
a at low pO2, few
haem groups
are bound to
oxygen, so
haemoglobin
does not
carry
much
oxygen
percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen
normal physiological range
of oxygen partial pressures
b at higher po,, more haem
groups are bound to oxygen,
making it easier for more
oxygen to be picked up
c the haemoglobin becomes
saturated at very high po,
as all the haem groups
become bound
10
15
partial pressure of oxygen/kPa
Figure 1 The oxygen dissociation curve for human haemoglobin
186
8.5 The heart
Dissecting a heart A
The heart of a sheep or a pig is similar in shape and size
to a human heart and is often used in dissection. By
careful examination of a heart you can identify many
of the important structures in the mammalian heart-
although the real thing is much more complicated than
the standard diagram in Figure 3.
The external view of the heart enables you to see
and trace the coronary arteries which supply the
heart muscle with the blood it needs to beat. It is the
narrowing or blockage of these blood vessels that cause
the symptoms of coronary heart disease and even
heart attacks.
Figure 3 Anterior view of a sheep's heart
However hearts obtained from the butcher are often not
intact. The major blood vessels will have been cut right
back and often the atria have been removed - people
don't want to eat all the tubes. So when you examine,
dissect and draw a heart, you have to be aware of which,
if any, parts are missing.
How does the dissected heart in Figure 4 differ
from the diagram of the structures of the heart
in Figure 2? Compare the two and explain the
differences
A Figure 4 A dissected sheep's heart, as you can see
a dissected mammalian heart shows its more complex
intricacies
The structure and function of the heart
Deoxygenated blood enters the right atrium of the heart from the
upper body and head in the superior vena cava, and from the lower
body in the inferior vena cava, at relatively low pressure. The atria
have thin muscular walls. As the blood flows in, slight pressure builds
up until the atrio-ventricular valve (the tricuspid valve) opens to let
blood pass into the right ventricle. When both the atrium and ventricle
are filled with blood the atrium contracts, forcing all the blood into the
right ventricle and stretching the ventricle walls. As the right ventricle
starts to contract, the tricuspid valve closes, preventing any backflow of
blood to the atrium. The tendinous cords make sure the valves are not
turned inside out by the pressures exerted when the ventricle contracts.
The right ventricle contracts fully and pumps deoxygenated blood
through the semilunar valves into the pulmonary artery, which
transports it to the capillary beds of the lungs. The semilunar valves
prevent the backflow of blood into the heart.
At the same time oxygenated blood from the lungs enters the left
atrium from the pulmonary vein. As pressure in the atrium
builds the bicuspid valve opens between the left atrium and the
190
8.1 Transport systems in multicellular animals
The amount of blood flowing to a particular tissue can be adjusted by
widening or narrowing blood vessels. Most closed circulatory systems
contain a blood pigment that carries the respiratory gases.
Closed circulatory systems are found in many different animal
phyla, including echinoderms (animals such as sea urchins
and starfish), cephalopod molluscs including the octopods and
squid, annelid worms including the common earthworm, and
all of the vertebrate groups, including the mammals.
capillaries
in gills
ventricle
atrium
capillaries in
rest of body
Single closed circulatory systems
Single closed circulatory systems are found in a number
of groups including fish and annelid worms. In single
circulatory systems (Figure 3) the blood flows through the
heart and is pumped out to travel all around the body before
returning to the heart. In other words, the blood travels
only once through the heart for each complete circulation of
the body.
A Figure 3 The single closed circulatory
system of a fish
In a single closed circulation, the blood passes through two sets of
capillaries (microscopic blood vessels) before it returns to the heart.
In the first, it exchanges oxygen and carbon
dioxide. In the second set of capillaries, in
the different organ systems, substances are
exchanged between the blood and the cells.
As a result of passing through these two sets
of very narrow vessels, the blood pressure in
the system drops considerably so the blood
returns to the heart quite slowly. This limits
the efficiency of the exchange processes so the
activity levels of animals with single closed
circulations tends to be relatively low.
A Figure 4 The single closed
circulatory system of a fish. Dissection
of this trout shows the close proximity
of the fish heart to the gills. Fish hearts
have one atrium and one ventricle
heart
Fish are something of an exception. They
have a relatively efficient single circulatory
system, which means they can be very
active. They have a countercurrent gaseous
exchange mechanism in their gills that allows
them to take a lot of oxygen from the water. Their body weight is
supported by the water in which they live and they do not maintain
their own body temperature. This greatly reduces the metabolic
demands on their bodies and, combined with their efficient gaseous
exchange, explains how fish can be so active with a single closed
circulatory system.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the mechanisms
of ventilation and gaseous
exchange in fish in Topic 7.4,
Ventilation and gas exchange in
other organisms.
Double closed circulatory systems
Birds and most mammals are very active land animals that maintain
their own body temperature. This way of life is made possible in
part by their double closed circulatory system (Figure 5). This is the
most efficient system for transporting substances around the body. It
involves two separate circulations:
176
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
• They have vessels that carry the transport medium.
They have a pumping mechanism to move the fluid around
the system.
When substances are transported in a mass of fluid with a mechanism
for moving the fluid around the body it is known as a mass transport
system. Large, multicellular animals usually have either an open
circulatory system or a closed circulatory system.
Open circulatory systems
In an open circulatory system there are very few vessels to contain
the transport medium. It is pumped straight from the heart into
the body cavity of the animal. This open body cavity is called the
haemocoel. In the haemocoel the transport medium is under low
pressure. It comes into direct contact with the tissues and the cells.
This is where exchange takes place between the transport medium
and the cells. The transport medium returns to the heart through an
open-ended vessel (Figure 2).
These open-ended circulatory systems are found mainly in invertebrate
animals, including most insects and some molluscs. Remember that
in insects, gas exchange takes place in the tracheal system. Insect
blood is called haemolymph. It doesn't carry oxygen or carbon
dioxide. It transports food and nitrogenous waste products and the
cells involved in defence against disease. The body cavity is split by a
membrane and the heart extends along the length of the thorax and the
abdomen of the insect. The haemolymph circulates but steep diffusion
gradients cannot be maintained for efficient diffusion. The amount of
haemolymph flowing to a particular tissue cannot be varied to meet
changing demands.
heart
heart
haemocoel
haemocoel in
the body of the insect
surrounding the organs
A Figure 2 The open circulatory system of a locust supplies the cells with food and
removes the nitrogenous waste products
Closed circulatory systems
In a closed circulatory system, the blood is enclosed in blood vessels
and does not come directly into contact with the cells of the body. The
heart pumps the blood around the body under pressure and relatively
quickly, and the blood returns directly to the heart. Substances leave
and enter the blood by diffusion through the walls of the blood vessels.
Synoptic link
You learnt about mechanisms of
ventilation and gaseous exchange
in insects in Topic 7.4, Ventilation
and gas exchange in other
organisms.
175
8.5 The heart
Specification reference: 3.1.2
The heart is the organ that moves the blood around the body. In some
animal groups it is no more than a simple muscular tube. In mammals
the heart is a complex, four-chambered muscular 'bag' found in the
chest, enclosed by the ribs and sternum.
The human heart
The heart consists of two pumps, joined and working together.
Deoxygenated blood from the body flows into the right side of the
heart, which pumps it to the lungs. Oxygenated blood from the lungs
returns to the left side of the heart, which pumps it to the body. The
blood from the two sides of the heart does not mix.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the external and
internal structure of the
mammalian heart
the cardiac cycle and how
the heart action is initiated
and coordinated
the use and interpretation of
electrocardiogram (ECG) traces.
The heart is made of cardiac muscle, which contracts and relaxes in
a regular rhythm. It does not get fatigued and need to rest like skeletal
muscle. The coronary arteries supply the cardiac muscle with the
oxygenated blood it needs to keep contracting and relaxing all the
time. The heart is surrounded by inelastic pericardial membranes,
which help prevent the heart from over-distending with blood.
vena cava
aortic arch
pulmonary
artery
right
atrium
pulmonary
veins
-left
right
coronary
artery
coronary
artery
carotid arteries
Meft
aorta
ventricle
right -
ventricle
superior
vena cava
cardiac
vein
- left pulmonary artery
vena cava
descending aorta
right
pulmonary
artery
A Figure 1 Diagram showing the
external structure of the heart
pulmonary veins
left atrium
cardiac
muscle
right atrium
semilunar valves
bicuspid valves
(left atrioventricular valve)
- septum
left ventricle
tricuspid
valve (right
atrioventricular
valve)
tendinous
cords
right-
ventricle
inferior
vena cava
very thick
muscular
wall of left
ventricle
Figure 2 The structure of the human heart is closely related to its function. In an
average lifetime it will beat around 3 x 10 times, and each ventricle will pump around
200 million litres of blood
189
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
1007 Pco2 = 3 kPa
When you are not very active, only about 25% of the oxygen carried
in your erythrocytes is released into the body cells. The rest acts as a
reservoir for when the demands of the body increase suddenly.
The effect of carbon dioxide
As the partial pressure of carbon dioxide rises in other words, at
higher partial pressures of CO2), haemoglobin gives up oxygen more
easily (Figure 2). This change is known as the Bohr effect. The
Bohr effect is important in the body because as a result:
percentage saturation of haemoglobin
with oxygen
Pco2 = 6 kPa
in active tissues with a high partial pressure of carbon dioxide,
haemoglobin gives up its oxygen more readily
in the lungs where the proportion of carbon dioxide in the air
is relatively low, oxygen binds to the haemoglobin molecules
easily.
5 10 15
partial pressure of oxygen/kPa
A Figure 2 The Bohr shift - as the
proportion of carbon dioxide increases,
the oxygen dissociation curve for
haemoglobin moves to the right
fetal
haemoglobin
Fetal haemoglobin
When a fetus is developing in the uterus it is completely dependent
on its mother to supply it with oxygen. Oxygenated blood from
the mother runs close to the deoxygenated fetal blood in the
placenta. If the blood of the fetus had the same affinity for oxygen
as the blood of the mother, then little or no oxygen would be
transferred to the blood of the fetus. However, fetal haemoglobin
has a higher affinity for oxygen than adult haemoglobin at each
point along the dissociation curve (Figure 3). So it removes
oxygen from the maternal blood as they move past each other.
percentage saturation with oxygen
adult
haemoglobin
Transporting carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide is transported from the tissues to the lungs in
three different ways:
oź § 10
partial pressure of oxygen/kPa
Figure 3 The oxygen dissociation curves for
adult and fetal haemoglobin show how the fetus
can gain oxygen from the mother
About 5% is carried dissolved in the plasma.
10-20% is combined with the amino groups in the
polypeptide chains of haemoglobin to form a compound
called carbaminohaemoglobin.
75-85% is converted into hydrogen carbonate ions (HCO,
in the cytoplasm of the red blood cells.
Most of the carbon dioxide that diffuses into the blood from the cells is
transported to the lungs in the form of hydrogen carbonate ions.
Carbon dioxide reacts slowly with water to form carbonic acid (H,CO,).
The carbonic acid then dissociates to form hydrogen ions and hydrogen
carbonate ions.
CO + H2O=H,CO, > H+ + HCO,
In the blood plasma this reaction happens slowly. However, in the
cytoplasm of the red blood cells there are high levels of the enzyme
carbonic anhydrase. This enzyme catalyses the reversible reaction
between carbon dioxide and water to form carbonic acid. The carbonic
acid then dissociates to form hydrogen carbonate ions and hydrogen ions.
187
8.4 Transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood
The negatively charged hydrogen carbonate ions move out of the
erythrocytes into the plasma by diffusion down a concentration
gradient and negatively charged chloride ions move into the
erythrocytes, which maintains the electrical balance of the cell. This
is known as the chloride shift.
CO, diffuses
into bloodstream
5% remains
dissolved in
plasma (as CO2)
By removing the carbon dioxide and converting
it to hydrogen carbonate ions, the erythrocytes
maintain a steep concentration gradient for
carbon dioxide to diffuse from the respiring tissues
into the erythrocytes.
95% diffuses
into rbcs
10-20% binds to
Hb forming
carbaminohaemoglobin,
Hb-CO2
75-85% converted
to H2CO3 by
carbonic anhydrase
When the blood reaches the lung tissue where
there is a relatively low concentration of carbon
dioxide, carbonic anhydrase catalyses the reverse
reaction, breaking down carbonic acid into carbon
dioxide and water. Hydrogen carbonate ions
diffuse back into the erythrocytes and react with
hydrogen ions to form more carbonic acid. When
this is broken down by carbonic anhydrase it
releases free carbon dioxide, which diffuses out of
the blood into the lungs. Chloride ions diffuse out
of the red blood cells back into the plasma down
an electrochemical gradient.
H2CO, dissociates
into H and HCO,
H+ removed
by buffers,
especially Hb
HCO3 moves out
of rbc in exchange
for CI (chloride shift)
Figure 4 The transport of carbon dioxide in the blood is a
complex process
Haemoglobin in the erythrocytes also plays
a role in this process. It acts as a buffer and
prevents changes in the pH by accepting free
hydrogen ions in a reversible reaction to form
haemoglobinic acid.
Summary questions
1 Explain how the structure of erythrocytes is adapted to their
function in the body.
(3 marks)
2 a Draw the oxygen dissociation curve for normal adult
haemoglobin and fetal haemoglobin.
(2 marks)
b What is the difference in the oxygen saturation of adult
and fetal haemoglobin at a partial pressure of oxygen
of 6 kPa? Explain the importance of this difference in the
survival of the fetus.
(3 marks)
3 Myoglobin is an oxygen-binding molecule found in the muscles.
a Sketch a graph to showing myoglobin oxygen affinity
and haemoglobin oxygen affinity.
(2 marks)
b Explain the differences between the two curves. (2 marks)
4 Use a flow chart to summarise how the carbon dioxide produced
in the cells is carried to the lungs in the red blood cells. (6 marks)
188
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
8.1 Transport systems in
multicellular animals
Specification reference: 3.1.2
In the previous chapter you looked at why multicellular organisms
need exchange surfaces. They also need transport systems to supply
oxygen and nutrients to the sites where they are needed and to remove
waste products from the individual cells.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the need for transport systems
in multicellular animals
the different types of
circulatory systems found in
multicellular animals.
The need for specialised transport systems
in animals
In single-celled organisms, processes such as diffusion, osmosis, active
transport, endocytosis and exocytosis can supply everything the cell
needs to import or export. These processes are also important in
multicellular organisms, transporting substances within and between
individual cells. However, as organisms get bigger, the distances
between the cells and the outside of the body get greater. Diffusion
would transport substances into and out of the inner core of the
body, but it would be so slow that the organism would not survive.
Specialised transport systems are needed because:
A Figure 1 When a multicellular animal
takes in food, the nutrients have to be
transported to all the cells in the body
the metabolic demands of most multicellular animals are high
(they need lots of oxygen and food, they produce lots of waste
products, so diffusion over the long distances is not enough to
supply the quantities needed
the surface area to volume (SA:V) ratio gets smaller as multicellular
organisms get bigger so not only do the diffusion distances get
bigger but the amount of surface area available to absorb or remove
substances becomes relatively smaller
molecules such as hormones or enzymes may be made in one place
but needed in another
food will be digested in one organ system, but needs to be transported
to every cell for use in respiration and other aspects of cell metabolism
waste products of metabolism need to be removed from the cells
and transported to excretory organs.
Synoptic link
You learnt about surface area
to volume ratio in Topic 71,
Specialised exchange surfaces.
Synoptic link
It will be useful now to recap your
understanding of the various
mechanisms for the movement of
molecules across membranes in
Topics 4.3-4.5 Diffusion, Active
transport, and Osmosis.
Types of circulatory systems
Most large, multicellular animals have specialised circulatory systems
(transport systems) which carry gases such as oxygen and carbon
dioxide, nutrients, waste products and hormones around the body.
Most circulatory systems have features in common:
•
They have a liquid transport medium that circulates around the
system (blood).
174
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
left ventricle so the ventricle also fills with oxygenated blood. When
both the atrium and ventricle are full the atrium contracts, forcing all
the oxygenated blood into the left ventricle. The left ventricle then
contracts and pumps oxygenated blood through semilunar valves into
the aorta and around the body. As the ventricle contracts the tricuspid
valve closes, preventing any backflow of blood.
The muscular wall of the left side of the heart is much thicker than
that of the right. The lungs are relatively close to the heart, and the
lungs are also much smaller than the rest of the body so the right side
of the heart has to pump the blood a relatively short distance and only
has to overcome the resistance of the pulmonary circulation. The left
side has to produce sufficient force to overcome the resistance of the
aorta and the arterial systems of the whole body and move the blood
under pressure to all the extremities of the body.
The septum is the inner dividing wall of the heart which prevents the
mixing of deoxygenated and oxygenated blood.
The right and left side of the heart fill and empty together.
A hole in the heart
The development of the septum is not completed until after birth. In the
fetus the blood is oxygenated in the placenta, not in the lungs. As a result,
all the blood in the heart is very similar and so mixes freely. In the days
after birth the gap in the septum closes to ensure that the deoxygenated
and oxygenated bloods are kept completely separate. Any gap remaining
in the septum after the first few weeks of life is referred to as a 'hole in the
heart' and it can often be heard with a stethoscope as a heart murmur.
Many people have a small hole in their septum without knowing about it.
However, if the hole is large it can lead to severe health problems unless it is
diagnosed and repaired by surgery.
1 Explain why a small hole in the septum of the heart might not have
any adverse effects but a large hole will cause health problems.
The cardiac cycle and the heartbeat
The cardiac cycle describes the events in a single heartbeat, which
lasts about 0.8 seconds in a human adult.
In diastole the heart relaxes. The atria and then the ventricles fill
with blood. The volume and pressure of the blood in the heart build
as the heart fills, but the pressure in the arteries is at a minimum.
In systole the atria contract (atrial systole), closely followed by
the ventricles (ventricular systole). The pressure inside the heart
increases dramatically and blood is forced out of the right side of the
heart to the lungs and from the left side to the main body circulation.
The volume and pressure of the blood in the heart are low at the end
of systole, and the blood pressure in the arteries is at a maximum.
191
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
8
heart
stomach
artery
to foot
5
gills
foot
vein from foot
different than that of haemoglobin.
(2 marks)
(ii) Suggest why the curve for myoglobin
is not sigmoidal.
(2 marks)
(iii) Draw a curve on the graph for fetal
haemoglobin.
(2 marks)
The majority of carbon dioxide released
by respiring cells diffuses into red
blood cells, Carbon dioxide can bind to
haemoglobin forming a compound called
carbaminohaemoglobin. About 10% of
carbon dioxide is transported to the lungs by
this method.
The remaining carbon dioxide undergoes an
enzyme controlled reaction once inside a red
blood cell.
a State what type of molecule forms an
enzyme.
(2 marks)
b Describe what an enzyme does. (2 marks)
c Outline the fate of carbon dioxide after it
has entered a red blood but does not bind
to haemoglobin.
(3 marks)
4
State, with reasons, which type of circulatory
system is present in a mollusc. (4 marks)
Varicose veins occur when the valves in the
veins fail to work correctly and blood starts to
pool in the veins. This occurs most commonly
in the legs and feet.
a State the function of the valves in
the veins.
(1 mark)
b Suggest why you do not see 'varicose
arteries'.
(2 marks)
(i) Explain why haemoglobin is known
as a conjugate protein. (2 marks)
(ii) Explain why an oxygen dissociation
curve is sigmoidal (s shaped).
(4 marks)
d Name the molecule formed when carbon
dioxide binds to haemoglobin. (1 mark)
Myoglobin is a molecule with one haem
group that binds to oxygen and only
releases it at low oxygen levels. It effectively
acts as store of oxygen in muscles.
100
myoglobin
hemoglobin
percentage saturation with oxygen
0
ITT
5 10
partial pressure of oxygen/kPa
(i) Explain why the position of the
dissociation curve for myoglobin is
197
8.5 The heart
contracting
left atrium
relaxing
relaxing
contracting
relaxing
semilunar
valve closes
1
-
-
-
left ventricle
relaxing
aortic pressure rises when
semilunar
ventricles contract as blood
valve opens
is forced into the aorta. It
then gradually falls, but
never below around 12 kPa.
because of the elasticity of
its wall, which creates a
recoil action - essential if
blood is to be constantly
delivered to the tissues. The
recoil produces a temporary
rise in pressure at the start
of the relaxation phase.
-
-
-
pressure / kPa
-
ventricular pressure is low
at first, but gradually
increases as the ventricles
fill with blood as the atria
contract. The left
atrioventricular valves
close and pressure rises
dramatically as the thick
muscular walls of the
ventricle contract. As
pressure rises above that
of the aorta, blood is
forced into the aorta past
the semilunar valves.
Pressure falls as the
ventricles empty and the
walls relax.
-
-
atrioventricular
valve
closes
atrioventricular
valve
opens
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
atrial pressure is always
relatively low because the
thin walls of the atrium
cannot create much force.
It is highest when they are
contracting, but drops
when the left
atrioventricular valve closes
and its walls relax. The
atria then fill with blood,
which leads to a gradual
build-up of pressure until a
slight drop when the left
atrioventricular valve opens
and some blood moves into
the ventricle.
volume of left ventricle / cm3
ventricular volume rises
as the atria contract
and the ventricles fill
with blood, and then
drops suddenly as blood
is forced out into the
aorta when the
semilunar valve opens.
Volume increases again
as the ventricles fill
with blood.
-
-
-
-
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.4
time / s
heart sounds
electrocardiogram
(ECG) - shows
electrical activity
in the heart
atrial
systole
P 0.1
ventricular
systole
0.2 0.3 0.4
diastole
0.5
0.6 Time/s
A Figure 5 Some of the pressure
changes in the heart during the cardiac
cycle, as well as the heart sounds and
an ECG trace
Heart sounds
The sounds of the heartbeat, which can be heard through a
stethoscope, are made by blood pressure closing the heart valves. The
two sounds of a heartbeat are described as 'lub-dub'. The first sound
comes as the blood is forced against the atrio-ventricular valves as
the ventricles contract, and the second sound comes as a backflow of
blood closes the semilunar valves in the aorta and pulmonary artery as
the ventricles relax.
192
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
A stethoscope is positioned over the blood vessels at the
elbow. Air is slowly let out of the cuff. The pressure at which
the blood sounds first reappear as a slight tapping sound
is recorded. The first blood to get through the cuff is that
under the highest pressure - in other words, when the left
ventricle of the heart is contracting strongly. The height of
the mercury at this point gives the systolic blood pressure
in mmHg (the height of the mercury column). The blood
sounds return to normal at the point when even the lowest
pressure during diastole is sufficient to get through the
cuff. This gives the diastolic blood pressure. A reading of
120/80 mmHg is regarded as being normal. More recently
a simpler, digital sphygmomanometer is often used - but
the same principles apply. The stethoscope is simply built
into the cuff applied around the arm.
A Figure 8 Measuring blood pressure with a aneroid
sphygmomanometer
1 Blood pressure is used as an indicator of the
health of both the heart and the blood vessels.
A weakened heart may produce a low blood
pressure, whereas damaged blood vessels that
are closing up or becoming less elastic will give
a raised blood pressure. Explain how these
symptoms might be produced.
Summary questions
1 Explain why healthy coronary arteries are important for
maintaining a regular heart rhythm.
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
2 a What causes the heart sounds?
b Explain the relationship between the heart sounds and
the events of the cardiac cycle.
(6 marks)
3 Explain the following responses:
a Bradycardia is common in diving mammals such as whales
and seals.
(5 marks)
b Many people experience tachycardia when they travel to
high altitudes.
(5 marks)
4 Look carefully at Figure 7:
a Work out the heart rate of the individuals with i) a normal heart
rhythm ii) bradycardia and iii) tachycardia.
(4 marks)
b What is the percentage decrease or increase in the heart
rate over the normal rate in these patients?
(3 marks)
195
Chapter 8 Practice questions
3
The diagram below summarises the formation
of tissue fluid.
Practice questions
1 In mammals, the lungs are adapted to enable
efficient gaseous exchange.
The table below lists some of the adaptations
of the lungs.
Complete the table explaining how each
adaptation improves the efficiency of gaseous
exchange.
net hydrostatic 33 A
pressure
net -20
osmotic
pressure
net 13
hydrostatic
pressure
-20
net
osmotic
pressure
blood flow
Adaptation
arterial end
venous end
How this adaptation improves
efficiency of gaseous exchange
squamous epithelium
large number of alveoli
good blood supply
good ventilation
(4 marks)
OCR F211/01 2013
(i) Calculate the net filtration pressures
(NFP) at either end of the capillary in
the diagram above:
arterial end
venous end
(2 marks)
Interstitial fluid is constantly being formed
at the arterial ends of capillary networks.
Approximately 90% of this fluid is
reabsorbed at the venous end.
(ii) Describe what happens to the other
10% and explain what could happen
if this process did not occur.
(4 marks)
Transport systems are essential in
multicellular organisms to overcome the
limitations of diffusion.
b
Animals and fish live in completely different
environments. However their cells respire
in the same way and depend on a constant
supply of oxygen.
a Explain how both gills and lungs are
designed to maximise the rate of diffusion
in gaseous exchange.
(4 marks)
b Using the simple representations of the
two systems below, discuss the different
way that gills and lungs are designed to
maximise the rate of gaseous exchange.
(3 marks)
Using a mammalian transport system as
an example, explain why diffusion is still
an essential process.
(3 marks)
The diagram shows the circulatory system
of a mollusc.
water
body inside
body inside
gills
lungs
196
8.5 The heart
TV
Heart rhythm abnormalities that commonly show up on
ECGs include:
-1.0 s-
(a) Normal ECG - beats evenly spaced, rate 60-100/min
Tachycardia - when the heartbeat is very rapid, over
100 bpm. This is often normal, for instance when you
exercise, if you have a fever, if you are frightened or
angry. If it is abnormal it may be caused by problems
in the electrical control of the heart and may need to
be treated by medication or by surgery.
(b) Bradycardia – slow heart rate – beats evenly spaced,
rate <60/min
• Bradycardia - when the heart rate slows down to
below 60 bpm. Many people have bradycardia because
they are fit - training makes the heart beat more
slowly and efficiently. Severe bradycardia can be
serious and may need an artificial pacemaker to keep
the heart beating steadily.
(c) Tachycardia - fast heart rate-beats evenly spaced,
rate >100/min
Ectopic heartbeat - extra heartbeats that are out of
the normal rhythm. Most people have at least one a
day. They are usually normal but they can be linked to
serious conditions when they are very frequent.
extrasystole pause
(d) Ectopic heart beat - altered rhythm, extra beat followed
by longer than normal gap before the next beat
Atrial fibrillation - this is an example of an
arrhythmia, which means an abnormal rhythm of
the heart. Rapid electrical impulses are generated in
the atria. They contract very fast (fibrillate) up to 400
times a minute. However, they don't contract properly
and only some of the impulses are passed on to the
ventricles, which contract much less often. As a result
the heart does not pump blood very effectively.
(e) Atrial fibrillation - abnormal irregular rhythm from atria,
ventricles lose regular rhythm
Figure 7 Normal and abnormal ECGs
Blood pressure
The blood travels through the arterial system at
pressures that vary as the ventricles contract. The blood
pressure is also affected by the diameter of the blood
vessels themselves. Narrowing the arteries is one way in
which the body affects and controls local blood flow, but
permanent changes can cause severe health problems.
as two figures, the first higher than the second. But
what is being measured? Traditionally blood pressure is
measured using a manual sphygmomanometer. A cuff,
which is connected to a mercury manometer (a way
of measuring pressure using the height of a column of
mercury), is placed around the upper arm. The cuff is
then inflated until the blood supply to the lower arm is
completely cut off.
Most people will have their blood pressure taken at
some point in their lives. Blood pressure is expressed
194
8.3 Blood, tissue fluid, and lymph
Specification reference: 3.1.2
Blood is the main transport medium of the human circulatory system,
but it is only part of the story. Tissue fluid is the other important
player in the exchange of substances between the blood and the cells.
A third liquid, lymph, is also part of the complex system that makes up
the circulation of the body.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the differences in the
composition of blood, tissue
fluid and lymph
► the formation of tissue fluid
from plasma.
Blood
Blood consists of a yellow liquid - plasma - which carries a wide
variety of other components including dissolved glucose and
amino acids, mineral ions, hormones, and the large plasma proteins
including albumin (important for maintaining the osmotic potential
of the blood), fibrinogen (important in blood clotting) and globulins
(involved in transport and the immune system). Plasma also transports
red blood cells (which carry oxygen to the cells and also give the blood
its red appearance) and the many different types of white blood cells.
It also carries platelets. Platelets are fragments of large cells called
megakaryocytes found in the red bone marrow, and they are involved
in the clotting mechanism of the blood. Plasma makes up 55% of the
blood by volume - and much of that volume is water. Only the plasma
and the red blood cells are involved in the transport functions of the
blood. The other components have different functions.
308002
C
blood by volume and much of the
A Figure 1 Human blood under the
light microscope
Functions of the blood
The composition of the blood is closely related
to its functions in the body, many of which
involve transport. They include transport of:
55%
45%
erythrocytes
(red blood cells, rbcs)
plasma
platelets - fragments of large
megakaryocytes found in the
red bone marrow, platelets are
involved in blood clotting
leucocytes
(white blood cells, wbcs)
there are many different types
with different functions
oxygen to, and carbon dioxide from, the
respiring cells
digested food from the small intestine
nitrogenous waste products from the
cells to the excretory organs
chemical messages (hormones)
food molecules from storage compounds
to the cells that need them
platelets to damaged areas
cells and antibodies involved in the
immune response.
A Figure 2 The main cellular components of the blood. 1 mm of healthy
blood contains around 5 million erythrocytes, 7000 leucocytes and
250 000 platelets, which are cell fragments
Synoptic link
The blood also contributes to maintenance of a steady body temperature
and acts as a buffer, minimising pH changes.
You will learn more about clotting
of the blood, phagocytosis, and
the immune system in Topic 12.5,
The specific immune system.
182
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
large vein
venule
medium-
sized vein
>lcm
<lcm
relative
proportions of:
0.1 mm
elastin
smooth muscle
collagen
A Figure 5 The differing proportions of components of the
vein and venule walls depending on how far the vein is from the
heart and thus its role in the body
wall of vein
Deoxygenated blood in the veins must be returned to the heart to be
pumped to the lungs and oxygenated again. However, the blood is
under low pressure and needs to move against gravity. There are three
main adaptations that enable the body to overcome this problem:
valve flap
valve open
blood flowing towards the heart passes
easily through the valves
The majority of the veins have one-way valves at intervals. These
are flaps or infoldings of the inner lining of the vein. When blood
flows in the direction of the heart, the valves open so the blood
can pass through. If the blood starts to flow backwards, the valves
close to prevent this from happening.
Many of the bigger veins run between the big, active muscles in
the body, for example in the arms and legs. When the muscles
contract they squeeze the veins, forcing the blood towards the
heart. The valves prevent backflow when the muscles relax.
The breathing movements of the chest act as a pump. The pressure
changes and the squeezing actions move blood in the veins of the
chest and abdomen towards the heart.
blood flowing away
from the heart pushes
flaps of valve closed
--valve closed
blood flowing away from the heart
pushes valves closed and so blood is
prevented from flowing any further
in this direction
Figure 6 The valves in a vein prevent
the backflow of blood
In combination, these adaptations assist in the return of deoxygenated
blood to the heart.
Summary questions
1 Veins have valves but arteries do not explain why.
(3 marks)
2 The structure of an arteriole is different from the structure of
an artery. Describe the differences in structure and explain
how they are related to the functions of the vessels.
(2 marks)
3 a Explain how the different structures of large veins,
medium veins and venules are related to their functions
in the body.
b Explain why the venules and veins in the lungs are
so unusual.
(6 marks)
ve
(2 marks)
181
TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
The basic rhythm of the heart
Study tip
Cardiac muscle is myogenic – it has its own intrinsic rhythm at
Don't just describe the sino-atrial
around 60 beats per minute (bpm). This prevents the body wasting
resources maintaining the basic heart rate. The average resting heart
node (SAN) as the pacemaker of
the heart. It initiates the heartbeat
rate of an adult is higher, at around 70 bpm. This is because other
factors including exercise, excitement, and stress also affect our
by producing a wave of electrical
excitation which causes both of
heart rate.
the atria to contract followed by
The basic rhythm of the heart is maintained by a wave of electrical
the ventricles as a result of the
excitation, rather like a nerve impulse (Figure 6).
AVN delay.
A wave of electrical excitation begins in the pacemaker area called
the sino-atrial node (SAN), causing the atria to contract and so
Study tip
initiating the heartbeat. A layer of non-conducting tissue prevents
the excitation passing directly to the ventricles.
Be clear about the role of the SAN-
The electrical activity from the SAN is picked up by the atrio-
explain the two effects of the wave
ventricular node (AVN). The AVN imposes a slight delay before
of excitation generated there.
stimulating the bundle of His, a bundle of conducting tissue
made up of fibres (Purkyne fibres), which
penetrate through the septum between the
ventricles.
The bundle of His splits into two branches and
sino-atrial -
node*
conducts the wave of excitation to the apex
bundle of His
(bottom) of the heart.
atrio-ventricular T
node
At the apex the Purkyne fibres spread out
through the walls of the ventricles on both sides.
right and left branches
The spread of excitation triggers the contraction
of Purkyne tissue
of the ventricles, starting at the apex. Contraction
starting at the apex allows more efficient
emptying of the ventricles.
Purkyne fibres
*The sino-atrial node (SAN) or natural pacemaker sets up a wave
The way in which the wave of excitation spreads of electrical excitation.
through the heart from the SAN, with AVN delay,
The atrioventricular node (AVN) is excited by the SAN. From here
the excitation passes into the Purkyne tissue.
makes sure that the atria have stopped contracting
before the ventricles start.
Figure 6 The SAN initiates the heartbeat
Electrocardiograms
You can measure the spread of electrical excitation through the heart
as a way of recording what happens as it contracts. This recording
of the electrical activity of the heart is called an electrocardiogram
(ECG). An ECG doesn't directly measure the electrical activity of your
heart. It measures tiny electrical differences in your skin, which result
from the electrical activity of the heart.
Study tip
Learn to recognise normal and
abnormal ECG patterns.
To pick up these tiny changes, electrodes are stuck painlessly to clean
skin to get the good contacts needed for reliable results. The signal
from each of the electrodes is fed into the machine, which produces
an ECG. A normal ECG is shown in Figure 5 and Figure 7(a). ECGS
are used to help diagnose heart problems. For example, if someone
is having a heart attack, recognisable changes take place in the
electrical activity of their heart, which can be used to diagnose the
problem and treat it correctly and fast.
193
