9
Chapter 9 Practice questions
In this student's table, the calculation of the
rate of diffusion is incorrect.
(i) suggest the method used to calculate
the rate of diffusion in the table
(1 mark)
(ii) state why the method in ei is not
correct
(1 mark)
OCR F211/01 2013
4
3 In an experiment to measure the rate of
diffusion, a student placed cubes of agar
jelly containing an indicator into dilute
hydrochloric acid. The indicator changes from
pink to colourless in acidic conditions.
The student used cubes of different sizes and
recorded the time taken for the pink colour of
each cube to disappear completely.
The students results are recorded in the table
Length Surface Volume Surface Time taken for Rate of
of side area of of cube area to pink colour diffusion
of cube cube (mm) volume to disappear (mm s-)
(mm) (mm)
ratio
(s)
| 24 8 3.0:0 50 0.020
5 150 125 1.2:1 120 0.021
10600 1000
300 0.017
20 2400 8000 0.3:1 700 0.014
30 5400 27000 0.2:1 1200 0.013
5
a Define diffusion.
(1 mark)
b Calculate the surface area to volume ratio
of the cube with 10 mm sides.
Show your working.
(2 marks)
c (i) Using the data in the table describe
the relationship between the rate
of diffusion and the surface area to
volume ratio.
(2 marks)
(ii) Explain the significance of the
relationship between rate of diffusion
and the surface area to volume ratio
for large plants.
(2 marks)
d Another student used the same raw data
obtained in the experiment but calculated
a different rate of diffusion for each cube.
This student's results are shown in the
table.
Xerophytes are plants adapted to living in
environments where little water is available.
These environments can be as varied as
deserts where there is a complete lack of
water or the antarctic where all the water is
present as ice or snow.
a Explain what is meant by the term
xerophyte.
(1 mark)
b Describe how a cactus plant is adapted
to the environment in which it lives.
(3 marks)
a Explain the difference between active
transport and facilitated transport.
(3 marks)
b Describe the difference in the direction of
movement in the phloem and xylem.
(2 marks)
c The following statements are evidence
that support the explanation of
translocation in phloem.
1 there is an exudation of solution from the
phloem when the stem is cut or punctured
by the mouthparts of an aphid
concentration gradients of organic solutes
are proved to be present between the sink
and the source.
3 when viruses or growth chemicals are
applied to a well-illuminated leaf, they
are translocated downwards to the roots.
This does not happen if the leaves are
shaded.
Explain how each statement supports this
explanation.
(6 marks)
Length of side
of cube (mm)
Time taken for
pink colour to
disappear (s)
50
Rate of
diffusion
(mm s-1)
0.040
2
5
120
0.042
10
300
0.033
20
700
0.029
30
1200
0.025
220
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
i) Given the following information,
copy and complete the table and fill
in the missing figures. (2 marks)
Practice questions
1 The term vascular is derived from the
Latin word vas meaning vessel.
a State what is meant by the term vascular
bundle.
(2 marks)
b Draw what you would expect to see in a
dicotyledonous plant stem. (2 marks)
minui
phloem
-xylem
Water loss ml
Time/minutes 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 | 24 | 2730
fan 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00
Mass of leaves = 1.1 g
Leaf Surface Area = 0.0044 m2
(ii) Suggest how the mass of leaves could
have been used to calculate the
surface area of the leaves. (3 marks)
(iii) State the independent variable, the
dependent variable and two variables
that would have been controlled in
the experiment.
(4 marks)
(iv) Plot a graph to display the results.
(4 marks)
(v) Identify any anomalous results giving
the reason for your choice. (2 marks)
(vi) Explain the trends shown on
the graph.
(4 marks)
d Describe how water is moving at A, B
and C in the diagram below.
monocot stem
2
c Describe and explain what happens when
a ring of bark is removed from a tree.
(4 marks)
The movement of water and solutes through
a plant is known as the transpiration
stream. It is the way essential minerals are
transported from roots to leaves.
a (i) Define transpiration. (2 marks)
(ii) Explain why transpiration is
an inevitable consequence of
photosynthesis.
(4 marks)
b (i) Name the piece of apparatus used to
measure transpiration. (1 mark)
(ii) Explain why the measurements
obtained from this apparatus are
only an estimate of the rate of
transpiration.
(2 marks)
C Table 1 below shows the readings obtained
using the apparatus named in bi for a plant
exposed to different environments.
The distance moved by a column of water
in a capillary tube was measured every
three minutes for 30 minutes as the plant
was exposed to each environment.
Water loss ml/m2
6 9 12 15
Time/minutes
0
3
18
21
21
24
27
30
fan
(6 marks)
treatment
mist 0.00 4.17 4.17 4.17 4.17 2.08 0.002.082.08 0.002.08
219
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
A Figure 7 Marram grass shows many adaptations to reduced water availability including both vertical
and horizontal roots as well as the stomatal pits, hairs, and curled leaves visible in the light micrograph
(* 10 magnification)
Hydrophytes
Not all plants have to conserve water. In fact the hydrophytes -
plants that actually live in water (submerged, on the surface or at
the edges of bodies of water) - need special adaptations to cope with
growing in water or in permanently saturated soil.
Examples of hydrophytes include water lilies (plants of the family
Nymphaeaceae) and water cress (Nasturtium officinale), which grow
at the surface, duckweeds (genus Lemna), which are submerged or
free-floating plants, and marginals such bulrushes (Typha latifolia) and
yellow iris (Iris pseudacorus), which grow at the edge of the water.
It is important in surface water plants that the leaves float so they are
near the surface of the water to get the light needed for photosynthesis.
Figure 8 Hydrophytes like this water
lily (family Nymphaeaceae) have no
need to conserve water, but they have
other problems to overcome
Water-logging is a major problem for all hydrophytes. The air spaces of
the plant need to be full of air, not water, for the plant to survive.
Adaptations of hydrophytes:
•
Very thin or no waxy cuticle - hydrophytes do not need to
conserve water as there is always plenty available so water loss by
transpiration is not an issue.
Many always-open stomata on the upper surfaces - maximising
the number of stomata maximises gaseous exchange. Unlike other
plants there is no risk to the plant of loss of turgor as there is always
an abundance of water available, so the stomata are usually open
all the time for gaseous exchange and the guard cells are inactive. In
plants with floating leaves such as water lilies the stomata need to be
on the upper surface of the leaf so they are in contact with the air.
Reduced structure to the plant - the water supports the leaves
and flowers so there is no need for strong supporting structures.
Wide, flat leaves - some hydrophytes, including the water lilies,
have wide, flat leaves that spread across the surface of the water to
capture as much light as possible.
217
9.3 Transpiration
Specification reference: 3.1.3
Photosynthesis, the process by which green plants make their own
food, takes place mainly in the leaves. Carbon dioxide (CO) and
water (HO) are both needed so, for successful photosynthesis to take
place in a leaf, water must be transported there from the roots and
carbon dioxide must be taken into the cells of the leaf from the air.
Carbon dioxide diffuses into the leaf cells down a concentration
gradient from the air spaces within the leaf. In a process of gaseous
exchange, oxygen (0,) also moves out of the leaf cells into the air
spaces by diffusion down a concentration gradient (oxygen is a waste
product of photosynthesis). At the same time water evaporates from
the surfaces of the leaf cells into the air spaces.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the process of transpiration
and the environmental factors
that affect transpiration rate
practical investigations to
estimate transpiration rates
the transport of water into
the plant, through the plant
and to the air surrounding
the leaves.
1
The process of transpiration
Leaves have a very large surface area for capturing sunlight and
carrying out photosynthesis. Their surfaces are covered with a waxy
cuticle that makes them waterproof. This is an important adaptation
that prevents the leaf cells losing water rapidly and constantly by
evaporation from their surfaces. However, it is also important that
gases can move into and out of the air spaces of the leaf so that
photosynthesis is possible.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
photosynthesis in Topic 17.3,
Photosynthesis.
Carbon dioxide moves from the air into the leaf and oxygen moves
out of the leaf by diffusion down concentration gradients through
microscopic pores in the leaf (usually on the underside of the leaf)
called stomata (singular stoma). The stomata can be opened and
closed by guard cells, which surround the stomatal opening (further
detail is given later in this topic).
When the stomata are open to allow an exchange of carbon dioxide
and oxygen between the air inside the leaf and the external air, water
vapour also moves out by diffusion and is lost. This loss of water
vapour from the leaves and stems of plants is called transpiration.
Transpiration is an inevitable consequence of gaseous exchange.
Stomata open and close to control the amount of water lost by a
plant, but during the day a plant needs to take in carbon dioxide for
photosynthesis and at night when no oxygen is being produced by
photosynthesis it needs to take in oxygen for cellular respiration, so at
least some stomata need to be open all the time.
It has been estimated that an acre of corn loses around 11 500-15000
litres of water through transpiration every day, whilst a single large
tree can lose more than 700 litres a day.
The transpiration stream
As you learn in Topic 9.2, water enters the roots of the plant by
osmosis and is transported up in the xylem until it reaches the
leaves. Here, it moves by osmosis across membranes and by diffusion
in the apoplast pathway from the xylem through the cells of
205
9.3 Transpiration
Study tip
the leaf where it evaporates from the freely permeable cellulose cell
walls of the mesophyll cells in the leaves into the air spaces. The water
vapour then moves into the external air through the stomata along a
diffusion gradient. This is the transpiration stream.
Be careful not to say that water
evaporates from the stomata,
water vapour leaves the stomata
by diffusion.
The transpiration stream moves water up from the roots of a plant to
the highest leaves - a height which can be up to 100 m or more in the
tallest trees. As you learn in Topic 9.1, xylem vessels are non-living,
hollow tubes so the process must be passive. How does it work?
• Water molecules evaporate from the surface of mesophyll cells
into the air spaces in the leaf and move out of the stomata into the
surrounding air by diffusion down a concentration gradient.
The loss of water by evaporation from a mesophyll cell lowers the
water potential of the cell, so water moves into the cell from an
adjacent cell by osmosis, along both apoplast and symplast pathways.
- upper epidermal cell
chloroplast
mesophyll cell
water moving to mesophyll
cell for use in photosynthesis
- xylem vessel
H20
apoplastic pathway
H20
symplastic pathway
- air space
water
- mesophyll cell
vapour
lower epidermal cell
guard cell
stoma
A Figure 1 Movement of water across a leaf
•
This is repeated across the leaf to the xylem. Water moves out of
the xylem by osmosis into the cells of the leaf.
Water molecules form hydrogen bonds with the carbohydrates
in the walls of the narrow xylem vessels - this is known as
adhesion. Water molecules also form hydrogen bonds with each
other and so tend to stick together - this is known as cohesion.
The combined effects of adhesion and cohesion result in water
exhibiting capillary action. This is the process by which water
206
9
9.5 Plant adaptations to water availability
Study tip
A few aquatic plants can survive in
brackish or salt water, for example
marine seagrass (Thalassia spp.).
Seaweeds, however, are not
vascular plants. They are
multicellular marine algae
and therefore not defined as
hydrophytic plants.
Small roots - water can diffuse directly into stem and leaf tissue so
there is less need for uptake by roots.
Large surface areas of stems and roots under water - this
maximises the area for photosynthesis and for oxygen to diffuse
into submerged plants.
Air sacs - some hydrophytes have air sacs to enable the leaves
and/or flowers to float to the surface of the water.
Aerenchyma - specialised parenchyma (packing) tissue forms
in the leaves, stems and roots of hydrophytes. It has many large
air spaces, which seem to be formed at least in part by apoptosis
(programmed cell death) in normal parenchyma. It has several
different functions within the plants, including:
making the leaves and stems more buoyant
forming a low-resistance internal pathway for the movement
of substances such as oxygen to tissues below the water. This
helps the plant to cope with anoxic (extreme low oxygen
conditions) conditions in the mud, by transporting oxygen to
the tissues.
Aerenchyma is found in crop species that grow in water, such as rice
(Oryza sativa and Oryza glaberrima). Studies suggest that aerenchyma
may provide a low resistance pathway by which methane produced by
the rice plants can be vented into the atmosphere. This is part of a major
problem. Atmospheric methane, which contributes of the greenhouse
effect and the resulting climate change, has doubled over the past two
centuries and flooded rice paddies represent a major source.
In situations where there is plenty of water - for example in mangrove
swamps, the roots can become waterlogged. It is air rather than water
that is in short supply. Special aerial roots called pneumatophores grow
upwards into the air. They have many lenticels, which allow the entry
of air into the woody tissue.
A Figure 9 Light micrograph showing
aerenchyma tissue in the stem of
a water lily leaf (Nymphaea alba) -
compare this to the TS stem of a land
plant you looked at in Topic 9.1 Transport
systems in dicotyledonous plants.
Summary questions
1 State three structural adaptations seen in the leaves of xerophytes
and explain how these are related to their functions. (3 marks)
2 State three structural adaptations of hydrophytes and
explain how they are related to their functions.
(3 marks)
3 Compare the challenges of a plant of living in dry conditions
to a plant living in water or waterlogged conditions.
(4 marks)
Synoptic link
You will learn about genetic
variation and adaptation to
the environment in Topic 10.5,
Types of variation and Topic 10.7,
Adaptations.
Based on your knowledge of plant adaptations to water availability,
suggest two characteristics that might be targeted by scientists in their
search for suitable genes to use in future crops to help them withstand
drought and two characteristics that might help them withstand
flooding. Explain the advantages they confer on the
plants and why you have chosen those characteristics. (6 marks)
218
9.5 Plant adaptations to water availability
Study tip
Clearly relate the structural
adaptations of the leaves of
xerophytic plants to their functions
in reducing the water vapour
potential gradient and so reducing
evaporation from the stomata, thus
reducing transpiration.
Root adaptations - many xerophytes have root adaptations that
help them to get as much water as possible from the soil. Long
tap roots growing deep into the ground can penetrate several
metres, so they can access water that is a long way below the
surface. A mass of widespread, shallow roots with a large surface
area able to absorb any available water before a rain shower
evaporates is another adaptation. Many cacti show both of these
adaptations, including the giant saguaro (Carnegiea gigantea), which
can get enough water to grow to around 12–18 metres tall and live
for around 200 years. The root system of marram grass consists of
long vertical roots that penetrate metres into the sand. They also
have a mat of horizontal rhizomes (modified stems) from which
many more roots develop to form an extensive network that helps
to change their environment and enable the sand to hold more
water.
Avoiding the problems - some plants are adapted to cope with
the problems of low water availability by avoiding the situation
entirely. Plants may lose their leaves and become dormant, or die
completely, leaving seeds behind to germinate and grow rapidly
when rain falls again. Others survive as storage organs such as bulbs
(onions, daffodils), corms (crocuses) or tubers (potatoes, dahlias). A
few plants can withstand complete dehydration and recover - they
appear dead but when it rains the cells recover, the plant becomes
turgid and green again and begins to photosynthesise. The ability
to survive in this way is linked to the disaccharide trehalose, which
appears to enable to the cells to survive unharmed.
A Figure 5 The folds in the stem of this
saguaro cactus (Carnegiea gigantea)
allow it to expand in the rare times when
water is freely available. A fully hydrated
saguaro can weigh over a tonne.
A Figure 6 A leafless palo
verde (Parkinsonia sp.) not only
photosynthesises but also flowers
without any leaves
Investigating stomatal numbers
You can compare the numbers of stomata on the leaves and stems of plants
by taking an impression of the epidermis of the leaf or the stem and looking
at it under a microscope.
You can use clear nail varnish, Germolene New Skin or DIY water based
varnish.
You need to observe the numbers of stomata, and whether they are open
or closed over the same area each time so take care to use the same
magnification with your microscope. You may choose to use a graticule.
This technique can be used to compare stomatal numbers in different areas
of a plant and in different types of plants. It can also be used to investigate
the opening and closing of the stomata under different conditions.
Synoptic link
1 How would you predict the number and position of the stomata
might vary between xerophytes and normal plants?
2 Suggest why it can be difficult to investigate the stomata of cacti,
even though they are some of the most effective xerophytes.
You learnt about disaccharides in
Topic 3.3, Carbohydrates.
216
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
221
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
Ways of conserving water
Xerophytes use a range of strategies for conserving water:
Synoptic link
You learned about the structure
and function of stomata in
Topic 6.4, The organisation
and specialisation of cells and
Topic 9.3, Transpiration.
Figure 2 The stomata of this sitka
spruce (Picea stichensis) are in sunken
pits and the thick waxy cuticle shows
up as a pale green layer - two clear
adaptations to minimise water loss
A thick waxy cuticle - in most plants up to 10% of the water loss
by transpiration is actually through the cuticle. Some plants have
a particularly thick waxy cuticle to help minimise water loss. This
adaptation is common in evergreen plants and helps them survive
both hot dry summers and cold winters when water can be hard
to absorb from the frozen ground. Holly (Ilex spp.) is an example
commonly seen in the UK.
Sunken stomata - many xerophytes have their stomata located in
pits, which reduce air movement, producing a microclimate of still,
humid (moist) air that reduces the water vapour potential gradient
and so reduces transpiration. These are seen clearly in xerophyes
such as marram grass, cacti, and conifers.
Reduced numbers of stomata - Many xerophytes have reduced
numbers of stomata, which reduce their water loss by transpiration
but also reduce their gas exchange capabilities.
Reduced leaves - by reducing the leaf area, water loss can be
greatly reduced. The leaves of conifers are reduced to thin needles.
These narrow leaves, which are almost circular in cross-section,
have a greatly reduced SA:V ratio, minimising the amount of
water lost in transpiration.
Hairy leaves - some xerophytes have very hairy leaves that, like
the spines of some cacti, create a microclimate of still, humid air,
reducing the water vapour potential gradient and minimising the
loss of water by transpiration from the surface of the leaf. Some
plants - such as marram grass - even have microhairs in the
sunken stomatal pits (Figure 4).
Curled leaves - another adaptation that greatly reduces water loss
by transpiration, especially in combination with other adaptations,
is the growth of curled or rolled leaves. This confines all of the
stomata within a microenvironment of still, humid air to reduce
diffusion of water vapour from the stomata. Marram grass is a
good example of a plant with this strategy.
Succulents - Succulent plants store water in specialised
parenchyma tissue in their stems and roots. They get their name
because, unlike other plants, they often have a swollen or fleshy
appearance. Water is stored when it is in plentiful supply and
then used in times of drought. Salicornia spp. (edible samphire),
which grows on UK salt marshes, and desert cacti are examples of
succulents, as are aloes, which include Aloe vera, a plant often used
in cosmetics.
Leaf loss – some plants prevent water loss through their leaves
by simply losing their leaves when water is not available. Palo
verde (Parkinsonia spp.) is a desert tree that loses all of its leaves
in the long dry seasons. The trunk and branches turn green and
photosynthesise with minimal water loss to keep it alive. Its name
is derived from the Spanish words meaning 'green pole'.
Figure 3 Reducing the leaves to
spines in this Barrel cactus prevents
transpiration from the leaves but also
helps create a microclimate to prevent
water loss from the stem
A Figure 4 This Borage flower growing
in the desert needs these very hairy
leaves to prevent water loss and survive
215
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
BA
Solute accumulation in source phloem leads to an
sieve-tube
mesophyll cell
member
increase in turgor pressure that forces sap to regions of
cell wall
lower pressure in the sinks. The pressure generated in the
companion
plasma membrane (transfer) cell
phloem is around 2 MPa (15000 mm Hg) – considerably
plasmodesm
higher than the 0.016 MPa (120 mm Hg) of pressure in a
human artery. These pressure differences in plants can
transport solutes and water rapidly over many metres.
Solutes are translocated either up or down the plant,
depending on the positions of the source.
phloem
apoplast route
parenchyma cell
mesophyll
Phloem unloading
symplast route
The sucrose is unloaded from the phloem at any point into
A Figure 2 The apoplast and symplast routes by which
the cells that need it. The main mechanism of phloem sucrose is loaded into the phloem
unloading seems to be by diffusion of the sucrose from
the phloem into the surrounding cells. The sucrose rapidly
moves on into other cells by diffusion or is converted into
another substance (for example glucose for respiration, starch
for storage) so that a concentration gradient of sucrose is
maintained between the contents of the phloem and the
surrounding cells.
cell
The loss of the solutes from the phloem leads to a rise in the
water potential of the phloem. Water moves out into the
surrounding cells by osmosis. Some of the water that carried
the solute to the sink is drawn into the transpiration stream
in the xylem.
A Figure 3 Aphids (order Hemiptera) are a simple
but very effective research tool for plant biologists.
Looking at the evidence
Top: Aphids penetrate the plant tissue with their
There is still a lot of research to be done to determine all the mouth parts or stylet (st) to reach the phloem (p).
details of translocation. But there is a body of evidence that Bottom: If the aphid is anaesthetised and removed
supports the main principles:
from the stylet, phloem continues to flow out of the
stylet due to pressure from the phloem contents. The
• Advances in microscopy allow us to see the adaptations of rate of flow and composition of sap can be analysed
the companion cells for active transport.
If the mitochondria of the companion cells are poisoned,
Summary questions
translocation stops.
The flow of sugars in the phloem is about 10 000 times faster than
1 Explain the difference between
it would be by diffusion alone, suggesting an active process is
a source and a sink. (4 marks)
driving the mass flow.
2 Describe how aphids can
Aphids can be used to demonstrate the translocation of organic
be used to demonstrate
solutes in the phloem. Using evidence from aphid studies, it has been
translocation, including the
shown that there is a positive pressure in the phloem that forces the
effect light intensity on the
sap out through the stylet. The pressure and therefore the flow rate in
process.
(5 marks)
the phloem is lower closer to the sink than it is near the source. The
concentration of sucrose in the phloem sap is also higher near to the 3 a Explain the role of active
source than near the sink.
transport in translocation
However, some questions remain. Not all solutes in the phloem move
in the phloem. (5 marks)
at the same rate. On the other hand, sucrose always seems to move at
b Describe the evidence
the same rate regardless of the concentration at the sink. And no one
that supports this
is yet completely sure about the role of the sieve plates in the process.
model. (5 marks)
213
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
Synoptic link
Transport systems in dicotyledonous plants
Dicotyledonous plants (dicots) make seeds that contain two
cotyledons, organs that act as food stores for the developing embryo
plant and form the first leaves when the seed germinates. There are
herbaceous dicots, with soft tissues and a relatively short life cycle
(leaves and stems that die down at the end of the growing season
to the soil level), and woody (arborescent) dicots, which have hard,
lignified tissues and a long life cycle (in some cases hundreds of years).
You will be looking at herbaceous dicots in this section.
It will help to look back at your
work on surface area : volume
ratios in Topic 71, Specialised
exchange surfaces and Topic 8.1,
Transport systems in multicellular
animals.
Dicotyledonous plants have a series of transport vessels running
through the stem, roots, and leaves. This is known as the vascular
system. In herbaceous dicots this is made up of two main types of
transport vessels, the xylem and the phloem, described later in
this topic. These transport tissues are arranged together in vascular
bundles in the leaves, stems, and roots of herbaceous dicots. The
pattern of the vascular tissue is easily recognised and is shown in
transections (TS) in Table 1.
Table 1
TS stem of young
herbaceous plant
-epidermis
cortex
phloem
+ xylem
-vascular bundle
-parenchyma
(packing and supporting tissue)
In the stem, the vascular bundles are around the edge
to give strength and support.
TS root of young herbaceous plant
root hair
- exodermis
epidermis
endodermis
– xylem
cortex
phloem
In the roots, the vascular bundles are in the middle to
help the plant withstand the tugging strains that result
as the stems and leaves are blown in the wind.
TS dicot leaf
palisade mesophyll-
main photosynthetic tissue
Xylem
vascular
bundle
phloem
midrib of leaf
In the leaves, the midrib of a dicot leaf is the main vein
carrying the vascular tissue through the organ. It also
helps to support the structure of the leaf. Many small,
branching veins spread through the leaf functioning
both in transport and support.
199
9.1 Transport systems in dicotyledonous plants
Observing xylem vessels in living plant stems
Xylem vessels can be seen clearly stained in transverse and longitudinal
sections of plant stems and roots on prepared slides. However, it is also
possible to observe these vessels in living tissue.
If plant material, for example celery stalks with plenty of leaves, flowers
such as a gerberas, or the roots of germinating seeds, are put in water
containing a strongly coloured dye for at least 24 hours, you can remove the
plant from the dye, rinse it and look for the xylem vessels which should have
been stained by the dye.
The structure and functions
of the xylem
The xylem is a largely non-
living tissue that has two main
functions in a plant – the transport
of water and mineral ions, and
support. The flow of materials in
the xylem is up from the roots
to the shoots and leaves. Xylem
is made up of several types of
cells, most of which are dead
when they are functioning in the
plant. The xylem vessels are the
main structures. They are long,
hollow structures made by several
columns of cells fusing together
end to end.
• In one specimen, make clean transverse cuts across the stem with a
sharp blade on a white tile. Take great care with the blade.
Observe and draw the position of the xylem vessels which should show
up as coloured spots.
In another specimen make a careful longitudinal cut through a region
where you expect there to be xylem vessels.
• Observe and draw the xylem vessels which may show up as coloured
lines.
How does the information from your dissection compare with the
micrographs of transverse and longitudinal sections of a dicot stem
in Table 1 on the previous page?
2 What are the limitations of this method of observing the transport
tissues in plants?
There are two other tissues
associated with xylem in
herbaceous dicots. Thick-walled
xylem parenchyma packs around
the xylem vessels, storing food, and
containing tannin deposits. Tannin
is a bitter, astringent-tasting
chemical that protects plant tissues
from attack by herbivores. Xylem
Xylem vessel showing lignin spirals
thick
lignified wall
xylem
parenchyma
lignified
cell wall
non-lignified
pit
>spirals of lignin
running around
the lumen of
the xylem, lignin
helps reinforce
the xylem vessels
so that they do not
collapse under the
transpiration pull
hollow tube
(no cytoplasm)
0000000000000
lumen of
xylem vessel
TS xylem
vessel
region where
end cell wall
has been lost
LS xylem
vessel
A Figure 2 Xylem tissue is both strong and vital
for the transport of water and minerals around
plants, lignified xylem vessels not shown
200
9.5 Plant adaptations to
water availability
Specification reference: 3.1.3
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
adaptations of plants to the
availability of water in their
environment, including
xerophytes and hydrophytes.
Land plants exist in a state of constant compromise between getting
the carbon dioxide they need for photosynthesis and losing the
water they need for turgor pressure and transport. They must have
a large SA:V ratio for gaseous exchange and the capture of light for
photosynthesis, but this greatly increases their risk of water loss
by transpiration.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the
adaptations of marram grass in
Topic 10.7, Adaptations.
Xerophytes
Most plants have adaptations to conserve water. These include a waxy
cuticle to reduce transpiration from the leaf surfaces, stomata found
mainly on the underside of the leaf that can be closed to prevent the
loss of water vapour, and roots that grow down to the water in the
soil. However, in habitats where water is often in very short supply,
this is not enough. In hot conditions, particularly hot, dry, and breezy
conditions - water will evaporate from the leaf surfaces very rapidly.
Plants in dry habitats have evolved a wide range of adaptations that
enable them to live and reproduce in places where water availability is
very low indeed. They are known as xerophytes.
Conifers (class Pinopsida) are xerophytes. So is marram grass
(Ammophila spp.), a plant found widely on sand dunes and coastal
areas, in dry and salty conditions.
Synoptic link
Many plants that survive in very cold and icy conditions are also
xerophytes - the water in the ground is not freely available to them
because it is frozen.
You will learn about the
classification and naming
of species in Topic 10.1,
Classification.
Perhaps the best known xerophytes are the cacti (members of the
plant family Cactaceae).
Synoptic link
You will learn about habitat
biodiversity in Topic 11.1,
Biodiversity and about
ecosystems in Chapter 23,
Ecosystems.
Figure 1 Successful desert plants like these have many adaptations to a
xerophytic way of life because the gap between rains may be months or even years so
water is rarely available
214
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
9.1 Transport systems in
dicotyledonous plants
Specification reference: 3.1.3
Plants have transport systems to move substances between leaves,
stems, and roots. These transport systems work at tremendous
pressures. The pressure in the phloem, one of the main transport
tissues of a plant, is around 2000 kPa. For comparison, the systolic
blood in your main arteries is at a pressure of around 16 kPa,
while the steam turbines in a power station work at around
4000 kPa. The higher pressures in plants, however, are confined
to much smaller spaces than in arteries and turbines.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the need for transport systems
in multicellular plants
the structure and function of
the vascular system in the
roots, stems and leaves of
herbaceous dicotyledonous
plants
The examination and drawing
of stained plant tissue sections
to show xylem and phloem.
The need for plant transport systems
There are three main reasons why multicellular plants need transport
systems:
Metabolic demands – The cells of the green parts of the plant
make their own glucose and oxygen by photosynthesis - but
many internal and underground parts of the plant do not
photosynthesise. They need oxygen and glucose transported
to them and the waste products of cell metabolism removed.
Hormones made in one part of a plant need transporting to the
areas where they have an effect. Mineral ions absorbed by the
roots need to be transported to all cells to make the proteins
required for enzymes and the structure of the cell.
Size - Some plants are very small but because plants continue
to grow throughout their lives, many perennial plants (plants
that live a long time and reproduce year after year) are large and
some of them are enormous. The tallest trees in the world include
the coastal redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) and giant redwood
(Sequoiadendron giganteum) in the USA (up to around 115 m tall)
and the mountain ash (Eucalyptus regnans) in Australia (up to
around 114 m tall). This means plants need very effective transport
systems to move substances both up and down from the tip of the
roots to the topmost leaves and stems.
Surface area: volume ratio (SA:V) - Surface area : volume
ratios are not simple in plants. Leaves are adapted to have a
relatively large SA:V ratio for the exchange of gases with the
air. However, the size and complexity of multicellular plants
means that when the stems, trunks, and roots are taken into
account they still have a relatively small SA:V ratio. This means
they cannot rely on diffusion alone to supply their cells with
everything they need.
A Figure 1 This saguaro cactus
(Carnegiea gigantea) in the Sonoran
Desert is as tall as many trees
Synoptic link
You will learn about the
classification and scientific
naming of species in Topic 10.1,
Classification.
198
9.4 Translocation
The process of translocation
Translocation is a vital and effective process - a large tree can transport
around 250 kg of sucrose down its trunk in a year, and substances
move at speeds of around 0.15–7 metres per hour. The details of how
substances are moved in the phloem of plants are still the subject of
active investigation but the main steps are described here:
Phloem loading
In many plants the soluble products of photosynthesis are moved into
the phloem from the sources by an active process. Sucrose is the main
carbohydrate transported - it is not used in metabolism as readily
as glucose and is therefore less likely to be metabolised during the
transport process.
There are two main ways in which plants load assimilates into the
phloem (phloem loading) for transport:
The symplast route
In some species of plants the sucrose from the source moves through
the cytoplasm of the mesophyll cells and on into the sieve tubes by
diffusion through the plasmodesmata (known as the symplast route).
Although phloem loading and translocation are often referred to as
active processes, this route is largely passive. The sucrose ends up in
the sieve elements and water follows by osmosis. This creates a pressure
of water that moves the sucrose through the phloem by mass flow.
The apoplast route
In some plant species sucrose from the source travels through the cell
walls and inter-cell spaces to the companion cells and sieve elements
(known as the apoplast route) by diffusion along a concentration
[outside cell] - high H+ concentration gradient, maintained by the removal of sucrose into the
phloem vessels. In the companion cells sucrose is moved
into the cytoplasm across the cell membrane in an active
co-transporter
proton pump
process. Hydrogen ions (H+) are actively pumped out of
the companion cell into the surrounding tissue using ATP.
The hydrogen ions return to the companion cell down a
concentration gradient via a co-transport protein. Sucrose
is the molecule that is co-transported. This increases the
ATP
ADP+P
sucrose concentration in the companion cells and in the
sieve elements through the many plasmodesmata between
[inside cell] - low Ht concentration the two linked cells.
A Figure 1 The active movement of
Companion cells have many infoldings in their cell membranes to give
sucrose (S) into a companion cell or
an increased surface area for the active transport of sucrose into the
sieve tube across the cell membrane
cell cytoplasm. They also have many mitochondria to supply the ATP
needed for the transport pumps.
proton gradient
sucrose gradient
As a result of the build up of sucrose in the companion cell and sieve
tube element, water also moves in by osmosis. This leads to a build up
of turgor pressure due to the rigid cell walls. The water carrying the
assimilates moves into the tubes of the sieve elements, reducing the
pressure in the companion cells, and moves up or down the plant by
mass flow to areas of lower pressure (the sinks).
212
9.4 Translocation
Specification reference: 3.1.3
The leaves of a plant produce large amounts of glucose, which is
needed for respiration by all the cells of the plant. The glucose is
converted to sucrose for transport. When it reaches the cells where it
is needed it is converted back to glucose for respiration, or to starch
for storage, or used to produce the amino acids and other compounds
needed within the cell.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the mechanism of
translocation including the
transport of assimilates
between sources and sinks.
From source to sink
Plants transport organic compounds in the phloem from sources to
sinks (the tissues that need them) in a process called translocation.
In many plants translocation is an active process that requires
energy to take place and substances can be transported up or down
the plant. The products of photosynthesis that are transported are
known as assimilates. Although glucose is made in the process of
photosynthesis, the main assimilate transported around the plant is
sucrose. The sucrose content of most cell sap is only around 0.5%,
but it can be 20-30% of the phloem sap content.
Synoptic link
You learnt about glucose,
sucrose and starch in Topic 3.3,
Carbohydrates.
The main sources of assimilates in a plant are:
• green leaves and green stems
storage organs such as tubers and tap roots that are unloading
their stores at the beginning of a growth period
• food stores in seeds when they germinate.
Some of these need to transport resources downwards, and some need
to move materials up the plant.
The main sinks in a plant include:
roots that are growing and/or actively absorbing mineral ions
meristems that are actively dividing
any parts of the plant that are laying down food stores, such as
developing seeds, fruits or storage organs.
Table 1 Carbohydrates in cyclamen. The data in this table suggest that sucrose is
transported in the phloem
Plant part
Mean carbohydrate content
(ugg-fresh mass standard error of mean)
sucrose
1312 + 212
starch
62 +25
leaf blade
vascular bundle in the leaf stalk,
consisting of xylem and phloem
5757 - 1190
<18
417 +96
<18
tissue surrounding the vascular
bundle in the leaf stalk
buds, roots, and tubers
(underground storage organs)
2260 +926
152 + 242
211
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
fibres are long cells with lignified secondary walls that provide extra
mechanical strength but do not transport water. Lignin can be laid
down in the walls of the xylem vessels in several different ways. It can
form rings, spirals or relatively solid tubes with lots of small unlignified
areas called bordered pits. This is where water leaves the xylem and
moves into other cells of the plant.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the cells of the
xylem and phloem in Topic 6.4,
The organisation and specialisation
of cells.
The structure and functions of the phloem
Phloem is a living tissue that transports food in the form of organic
solutes around the plant from the leaves where they are made by
photosynthesis. The phloem supplies the cells with the sugars and
amino acids needed for cellular respiration and for the synthesis of all
other useful molecules. The flow of materials in the phloem can go
both up and down the plant.
The main transporting vessels of the phloem are the sieve tube
elements. Like xylem, the phloem sieve tubes are made up of many
cells joined end to end to form a long, hollow structure. Unlike xylem
tissue, the phloem tubes are not lignified. In the areas between the
cells, the walls become perforated to form sieve plates, which look
like sieves and let the phloem contents flow through. As the large
pores appear in these cell walls, the tonoplast (vacuole membrane),
the nucleus and some of the other organelles break down. The phloem
becomes a tube filled with phloem sap and the mature phloem cells
have no nucleus.
A Figure 3 Plants such as these desert
cholla grow big but do not form wood like
a tree, so they are very dependent on the
complex lignified xylem structures to act
as a supporting skeleton
Study tip
Closely linked to the sieve tube elements are companion cells, which
form with them. These cells are linked to the sieve tube elements by
many plasmodesmata - microscopic channels through the cellulose
cell walls linking the cytoplasm of adjacent cells. They maintain their
nucleus and all their organelles. The companion cells are very active
cells and it is thought that they function as a 'life support system' for the
sieve tube cells, which have lost most of their normal cell functions.
Be clear about the structural
differences between xylem and
phloem. Neither xylem vessels nor
mature sieve tubes have nuclei,
but xylem vessels are dead and
phloem vessels are living tissue.
Phloem tissue also contains supporting tissues including fibres and
sclereids, cells with extremely thick cell walls.
Summary questions
1 Explain why multicellular plants need transport systems.
sieve
plate
(4 marks)
companion cell -
D.
2 State three differences between transport systems in
multicellular plants and multicellular animals.
sieve
tube
element
(3 marks)
sieve tube
E BEH
3 State the positioning of the transport tissue in herbaceous
dicot stems, roots and leaves, and explain how this
positioning is related to their functions.
cytoplasm
+
(6 marks)
4 Compare and contrast the structure and function of the
main cell types in xylem and phloem tissues.
(6 marks)
A Figure 4 Phloem tissue transports
carbohydrates and other solutes around
a plant
201
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
can rise up a narrow tube against the force of gravity. Water is
drawn up the xylem in a continuous stream to replace the water
lost by evaporation. This is the transpiration pull.
The transpiration pull results in a tension in the xylem, which in
turn helps to move water across the roots from the soil.
This model of water moving from the soil in a continuous stream up the
xylem and across the leaf is known as the cohesion-tension theory.
Synoptic link
You learn about the adhesive and
cohesive properties of water and
capillary action in Topic 3.2, Water.
H20 vapour
air-space
200'OQC
epidermal
cell
mesophyll cell
water is drawn up in
the transpiration stream
as a result of the cohesive
forces between water
molecules
xylem vessel
casparian strip - prevents
movement of water across
the cell wall
apoplastic pathway
symplastic pathway
endodermal cell
root cortex
cell
root hair cell
soil particle
Figure 2 A model of water transport through a plant
rate of water flow
diameter of tree trunk
Evidence for the cohesion-tension theory
Several pieces of evidence support the cohesion-tension theory for the
movement of water up the xylem of a plant. These include the following:
00.00 06.00 12.00 18.00 24.00
time of day
A Figure 3 The relationship between
water flow in the xylem and the diameter
of a tree trunk
Changes in the diameter of trees. When transpiration is at its
height during the day, the tension in the xylem vessels is at its
highest too. As a result the tree shrinks in diameter. At night,
when transpiration is at its lowest, the tension in the xylem vessels
is at its lowest and the diameter of the tree increases. This can be
tested by measuring the circumference of a suitably sized tree at
different times of the day.
When a xylem vessel is broken – for example when you cut flower
stems to put them in water - in most circumstances air is drawn in
to the xylem rather than water leaking out.
If a xylem vessel is broken and air is pulled in as described in the
previous bullet, the plant can no longer move water up the stem
as the continuous stream of water molecules held together by
cohesive forces has been broken.
Study tip
Read questions about water
movement in plants carefully.
A question about how water in the
xylem in the root reaches the cells
of the leaves of a plant does not
require you to give any information
about the uptake of water from the
soil by the root hairs or about the
movement of water across the root.
In summary, transpiration delivers water, and the mineral ions
dissolved in that water, to the cells where they are needed. The
evaporation of water from the leaf cell surfaces also helps to cool the
207
9
9.3 Transpiration
leaf down and prevent heat damage (refer back to Topic 3.2, Water).
However, transpiration, specifically the water loss, is also a problem
for a plant because the amount of water available is often limited. In
high intensity sunlight when the plant is photosynthesising rapidly, there
will be a high rate of gaseous exchange, the stomata will all be open
and the plant may lose so much water through transpiration that the
supply cannot meet the demand.
any water loss measured is as a result of transpiration
from the stem and leaves (Figure 4).
Rate of water uptake = distance moved by air bubble/
time taken for air bubble to move that distance. The units
are cms-1.
A plant was placed in a potometer in bright light. The time
taken for the bubble to move 5 cm was recorded under
different conditions:
Measuring transpiration
It is very difficult to make direct measurements of
transpiration because of the practical difficulties with
condensing and collecting all of the water that evaporates
from the surfaces of the leaves and stems of a plant
without also collecting water that evaporates from the
soil surface. It is also very difficult to separate water
vapour from transpiration and water vapour produced as
a waste product of respiration.
However, it is relatively easy to measure the uptake of
water by a plant. As around 99% of the water taken up
by a plant is then lost by transpiration, water uptake
gives us a good working model of transpiration losses.
By measuring factors that affect the uptake of water by a
plant, you are effectively also measuring the factors that
affect the rate of transpiration.
The rate of water uptake can be measured in a variety
of ways. The most common is using a potometer. The
apparatus has to be set up with great care, and all joints
must be sealed with waterproof jelly to make sure that
Conditions
Time in Rate of bubble
seconds movement cm s 1
35.0 0.14
18.0
0.28
Normal lab conditions
Bright light directed at
leaves
Bottom surfaces of leaves
covered with vaseline
175.0
0.028
Data like these can be used to help demonstrate the
effect of different factors on transpiration
fresh shoot. The stem is cut under
water and transferred to the apparatus
to avoid introducing air bubbles to the
stem - but care must be taken NOT
to get water onto the leaves.
reservoir from which water can be
let into the capillary tube, pushing
the air bubble back to the start of
the scale
air tight
tap -
seal
0
capillary tube
1 How far did the bubble actually move
in each of the time periods?
2 Suggest an explanation for the result
when the bottom surfaces of the
leaves are covered with Vaseline
scale calibrated in cm
air bubble moves along tube as
water is absorbed by shoot
A Figure 4 A potometer - apparatus used for measuring water uptake from plants
208
9.2 Water transport in
multicellular plants
Specification reference: 3.1.3
Unlike some other multicellular organisms, plants do not have a
muscular heart beating to move fluids through the vessels of the
xylem and phloem. In this topic you are going to discover exactly how
they manage to move the substances they need through bodies that
may be many metres tall and weigh many tonnes.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the transport of water into
the plant, through the plant
and to the air surrounding the
leaves
the mechanisms of water
movement in plants.
Water transport in plants
Water is key in both the structure and in the metabolism of plants:
Synoptic link
You learnt about osmosis, water
potential and turgor pressure in
Topic 5.5, Osmosis.
Turgor pressure (or hydrostatic pressure) as a result of osmosis in
plant cells provides a hydrostatic skeleton to support the stems and
leaves. So, for example, the turgor pressure in leaf cells is around
1.5 MPa - that is 11251 mm Hg (unit of pressure still commonly
used in medicine) (human systolic blood pressure is around
120 mm Hg).
Turgor also drives cell expansion - it is the force that enables plant
roots to force their way through tarmac and concrete.
The loss of water by evaporation helps to keep plants cool.
Mineral ions and the products of photosynthesis are transported in
aqueous solutions.
Water is a raw material for photosynthesis.
To understand the role of water in plants we need to look at
how water moves into a plant from the soil and how it moves around
the plant.
Synoptic link
Movement of water into the root
Root hair cells are the exchange surface in plants where water is
taken into the body of the plant from the soil. A root hair is a long,
thin extension from a root hair cell, a specialised epidermal cell found
near the growing root tip.
You learnt about meristems in
plant roots and shoots (the tissues
of a plant where growth can take
place) in Topic 6.5, Stem cells. You
will learn more about plant growth
in Topic 16.1, Plant hormones and
growth in plants.
Root hairs are well adapted as exchange surfaces:
•
Their microscopic size means they can penetrate easily between
soil particles.
Each microscopic hair has a large SA:V ratio and there are
thousands on each growing root tip.
Each hair has a thin surface layer (just the cell wall and
cell-surface membrane) through which diffusion and osmosis
can take place quickly.
The concentration of solutes in the cytoplasm of root hair cells
maintains a water potential gradient between the soil water and
the cell.
202
9.3 Transpiration
rate of transpiration
the leaf decrease air movement close to the leaf. The water vapour
that diffuses out of the leaf accumulates here and so the water
vapour potential around the stomata increases, in turn reducing
the diffusion gradient. Anything that increases the diffusion
gradient will increase the rate of transpiration. So air movement or
wind will increase the rate of transpiration, and conversely a long
period of still air will reduce transpiration (Figure 7).
Soil-water availability – The amount of water available in the
soil can affect transpiration rate. If it is very dry the plant will be
under water stress and the rate of transpiration will be reduced.
light intensity
A Figure 6 Graph to show the effect of
light intensity on transpiration
a Still air
b Moving air
guard
stoma
inside of leaf
cells
inside of leaf
O OOO OC
thick layer
of moist air -
decreased water
vapour potential gradient
vapour potential gradient bien er water vapour
thin layer
of moist air -
increased water vapour
potential gradient
diffusion and mass movement
of water vapour
diffusion of water vapour
air movement
A Figure 7 The effect of air movements on the rate of transpiration
Summary questions
1 Explain the difference between transpiration and the transpiration stream.
(2 marks)
2 Compare root pressure and the transpiration pull.
(3 marks)
3 Describe how you might use a potometer to investigate the effect of air movements on
transpiration rates.
(6 marks)
4 In an investigation into water uptake by a shoot using a bubble potometer, a group recorded how far the
air bubble moved in a set time period of 40 seconds, in different conditions.
Their results are as follows:
a In the dark: 0.4 cm
(5 marks)
b In normal daylight: 5.6 cm
(5 marks)
c With bright lights shining on the plant shoot: 8.0 cm
(5 marks)
d With bright light shining and a fan blowing on the shoot: 12 cm
(6 marks)
Calculate the rate of water movement under each set of conditions and explain each result.
(6 marks)
5 a Describe the cohesion-tension theory of transpiration.
b Use the theory to explain:
i the changes in diameter measured in the trunk of a tree between midday and midnight
ii the fact that cut flowers placed in water may droop and die very quickly.
(4 marks)
(4 marks)
210
9.2 Water transport in multicellular plants
cytoplasm
waterproof
casparian strip
water in the apoplast
is forced into the
cytoplasm by the
casparian strip
The solute concentration in the cytoplasm of the endodermal cells
is relatively dilute compared to the cells in the xylem. In addition, it
appears that the endodermal cells move mineral ions into the xylem
by active transport. As a result the water potential of the xylem cells
is much lower than the water potential of the endodermal cells.
This increases the rate of water moving into the xylem by osmosis
down a water potential gradient from the endodermis through the
symplast pathway.
Once inside the vascular bundle, water returns to the apoplast
pathway to enter the xylem itself and move up the plant. The active
pumping of minerals into the xylem to produce movement of water by
osmosis results in root pressure and it is independent of any effects
of transpiration. Root pressure gives water a push up the xylem, but
under most circumstances it is not the major factor in the movement
of water up from the roots to the leaves.
endodermal cell
A Figure 3 The effect of the casparian
strip on the movement of water across
the endodermis
Xylem
vessel
water is drawn up in
the transpiration stream
as a result of the cohesive
forces between water
molecules
casparian strip - prevents
movement of water across
the cell wall
Evidence for the role of active transport in root pressure
It has taken some time and many different investigations to determine
the role of active transport in moving water from the root endodermis
into the xylem. There are several strands of evidence supporting the
current model:
NOUS
•
endodermal
cell
root /
cortex root
cortex root
cell hair cell
soil
particle
Some poisons, such as cyanide, affect the mitochondria and
prevent the production of ATP. If cyanide is applied to root cells so
there is no energy supply, the root pressure disappears.
Root pressure increases with a rise in temperature and falls with a
fall in temperature, suggesting chemical reactions are involved.
If levels of oxygen or respiratory substrates fall, root pressure falls.
Xylem sap may exude from the cut end of stems at certain times.
In the natural world, xylem sap is forced out of special pores at the
ends of leaves in some conditions – for example overnight, when
transpiration is low. This is known as guttation.
apoplastic pathway
→ symplastic pathway
Figure 4 The root cells provide a very
efficient system for moving water from
the soil into the xylem
Summary questions
1 Explain how a root hair cell is adapted for its role in the
uptake of water from the soil.
(4 marks)
2 Explain the differences between the apoplast and
symplast pathways for water movement across the
root of a plant into the xylem.
(6 marks)
(2 marks)
3 a Suggest why the effect of temperature on root pressure
is not sufficient to prove that active transport is involved
in the development of root pressure.
b Explain why the effects of cyanide, oxygen levels, and
respiratory substrates on root pressure are taken as
evidence that active transport is involved in the
development of root pressure.
Figure 5 Guttation - evidence for root
pressure independent of transpiration
(5 marks)
204
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
cellulose
cell wall
nucleus
Soil water has a very low concentration of dissolved minerals so it has
a very high water potential. The cytoplasm and vacuolar sap of the
root hair cell (and the other root cells) contain many different solvents
including sugars, mineral ions, and amino acids so the water potential
in the cell is lower. As a result water moves into the root hair cells by
osmosis.
soil
air
space
soil
cytoplasm vacuole
Movement of water across the root
Once the water has moved into the root hair cell it continues to move
across the root to the xylem in one of two different pathways:
I particles
thin
containing cellulose
cell sap - cell wall
solution
of ions and cell-surface
sugars, lower membrane
water
potential
solution
(very dilute
solution of
mineral
ions) higher
water
potential
TII
The symplast pathway
Water moves through the symplast - the continuous cytoplasm of
the living plant cells that is connected through the plasmodesmata -
by osmosis. The root hair cell has a higher water potential than the
next cell along. This is the result of water diffusing in from the soil,
which has made the cytoplasm more dilute. So water moves from the
root hair cell into the next door cell by osmosis. This process continues
from cell to cell across the root until the xylem is reached.
absorption of water
by osmosis
A Figure 1 Osmosis is the driving force
behind the absorption of water by a root
hair cell
Synoptic link
As water leaves the root hair cell by osmosis, the water potential of
the cytoplasm falls again, and this maintains a steep water potential
gradient to ensure that as much water as possible continues to move
into the cell from the soil.
You learned about water potential
in Topic 5.5, Osmosis.
cell 1
The apoplast pathway
This is the movement of water through the apoplast - the cell walls
and the intercellular spaces. Water fills the spaces between the loose,
open network of fibres in the cellulose cell wall. As water molecules
move into the xylem, more water molecules are pulled through the
apoplast behind them due to the cohesive forces between the water
molecules. The pull from water moving into the xylem and up the
plant along with the cohesive forces between the water molecules
creates a tension that means there is a continuous flow of water
through the open structure of the cellulose wall, which offers little or
no resistance.
cellulose cell
wall (fibres with
water-filled
spaces between)
cytoplasm
cell 2
vacuole (with cell
sap made up of a
dilute solution of
salts and sugars)
plasmodesma
(fine strand of
cytoplasm
linking adjacent
cells)
cell 3
+
►
apoplastic pathway
symplastic pathway
Movement of water into the xylem
Water moves across the root in the apoplast and symplast pathways
until it reaches the endodermis - the layer of cells surrounding the
vascular tissue (xylem and phloem) of the roots (Figure 4). The
endodermis is particularly noticeable in the roots because of the effect
of the Casparian strip. The Casparian strip is a band of waxy material
called suberin that runs around each of the endodermal cells forming a
waterproof layer (Figure 3). At this point, water in the apoplast pathway
can go no further and it is forced into the cytoplasm of the cell, joining
the water in the symplast pathway. This diversion to the cytoplasm is
significant as to get to get there, water must pass through the selectively
permeable cell surface membranes, this excludes any potentially-toxic
solutes in the soil water from reaching living tissues, as the membranes
would have no carrier proteins to admit them. Once forced into the
cytoplasm the water joins the symplast pathway.
Figure 2 The apoplast and symplast
pathways along which water moves
across the root
Synoptic link
You learnt about the properties of
water in Topic 3.2, Water.
203
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
Synoptic link
You learn about turgor pressure
in plant cells in Topic 5.5, Osmosis.
15-20 um
Stomata - controlling the rate of transpiration
As you learn at the start of this topic, the main way in which the
rate of transpiration is controlled by the plant is by the opening and
closing of the stomatal pores. This is a turgor-driven process. When
turgor is low the asymmetric configuration of the guard cell walls
closes the pore. When the environmental conditions are favourable
guard cells pump in solutes by active transport, increasing their
turgor. Cellulose hoops prevent the cells from swelling in width, so
they extend lengthways. Because the inner wall of the guard cell is
less flexible than the outer wall, the cells become bean-shaped and
open the pore. When water becomes scarce, hormonal signals from
the roots can trigger turgor loss from the guard cells, which close the
stomatal pore and so conserve water.
thin outer wall
a Stoma closed
chloroplast
cytoplasm
vacuole
nucleus
thick inner wall
b Stoma open
Factors affecting transpiration
Any factor affecting the rate of water loss from the leaves of a
plant will affect the rate of transpiration. Factors that affect water
loss from the leaf must either act on the opening/closing of the
stomata, the rate of evaporation from the surfaces of the leaf cells
or the diffusion gradient between the air spaces in the leaves and
the air surrounding the leaf. The effects of some of these factors are
described below:
stomatal aperture
A Figure 5 The opening and closing
of the stomata is vital to the control of
transpiration in a plant
Light is required for photosynthesis and in the light the stomata
open for the gas exchange needed. In the dark, most of the
stomata will close. Increasing light intensity gives increasing
numbers of open stomata, increasing the rate of water vapour
diffusing out and therefore increasing the evaporation from the
surfaces of the leaf. So, increasing light intensity increases the rate
of transpiration (Figure 6).
Relative humidity is a measure of the amount of water vapour
in the air (humidity) compared to the total concentration of
water the air can hold. A very high relative humidity will lower
the rate of transpiration because of the reduced water vapour
potential gradient between the inside of the leaf and the outside
air. Very dry air has the opposite effect and increases the rate of
transpiration.
Temperature affects the rate of transpiration in two ways:
An increase in temperature increases the kinetic energy
of the water molecules and therefore increases the rate of
evaporation from the spongy mesophyll cells into the air
spaces of the leaf.
An increase in temperature increases the concentration of water
vapour that the external air can hold before it becomes saturated
(so decreases its relative humidity and its water potential).
Both factors increase the diffusion gradient between the air inside and
outside the leaf, thus increasing the rate of transpiration.
Air movement - Each leaf has a layer of still air around it trapped
by the shape of the leaf and features such as hairs on the surface of
209
