4.2 Factors affecting enzyme activity
The student then investigated the effect of substrate concentration on enzyme activity.
Suggest a hypothesis for this experiment.
The results are shown below.
Percentage of
Volume of gas collected (cm) after ... (s)
Hydrogen peroxide
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
Test 1
100
43 62 68 74 76 77777777777777
30
12 21 24 26 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27
10
10 14 16 18 18 18 18 18 18 18 18 18
Test 2
100 42 62 70 65 76 77 77 77 77 77 77 77
30
1321 25 27 2828 28 28 28 28 28
10
8 15 17 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19
Test 3
100
43 63 68 74 75 76 77 7777777777
30 12 20 24 26 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27
8 14 17 18 1 8 18 18 18 18 18 18
10
Mean of three tests
100
77.0
770
30
762.
368.
771.
0
12.3 20.7 24.3 26.3
8.7 14.3 16.7 18.3
75.
776.7
273 273
18.3 18.3
770
273
18.3
77.0
273
18.3
770
273
18.3
77.0
27.3
18.3
27.3
18.3
| 27.3
18.3
10
5 Describe how the student would have carried out the
experiment at different temperatures.
6 a Name the independent variable and the
dependent variable in this experiment.
b List the controlled variables.
7 Explain the importance of keeping these variables
(controlled) constant.
8 a Explain the term anomaly.
b Identify any anomalies in the results above.
9 Explain why the student did the experiment three
times and then calculated the means of the results.
10 Plot a graph of the results.
11 Explain the shape of the graph you have produced.
12 Write an evaluation for this experiment.
Serial dilutions 2
Figure 5 shows how a serial dilution might be set up.
Adding 1 ml of stock solution to 9 ml of distilled water
gives 10 ml of dilute solution in which there is 1 ml
stock/10 ml hence a 1/10 or 10 fold dilution. This step is
repeated a number of times to give a serial dilution.
A serial dilution is a repeated, stepwise dilution of a
stock solution of known concentration. A serial dilution
is usually done by factors of ten, to produce a range of
concentrations. Serial dilutions are useful even if the
concentration of the initial solution is unknown as they
give us relative concentrations. Serial dilutions are used
in many different ways-for example to investigate the
effect of changing the concentration of an enzyme or a
substrate in a reaction, and in determining the numbers
of microorganisms in a culture.
Catalase is an enzyme that catalyses the breakdown of
hydrogen peroxide. To investigate the effect of different
concentrations of catalase on the rate of breakdown of
hydrogen peroxide, catalase-rich tissues such as liver
92
ENZYMES
a higher collision rate with the active sites of enzymes and the
formation of more enzyme-substrate complexes. The rate of reaction
therefore increases.
-
-
-
-
This is also true when the concentration of the enzyme increases. This
will increase the number of available active sites in a particular area or
volume, leading to the formation of enzyme-substrate complexes at a
faster rate.
rate of reaction
The rate of reaction increases up to its maximum (max). At this point
all of the active sites are occupied by substrate particles and no more
enzyme-substrate complexes can be formed until products are released
from active sites. The only way to increase the rate of reaction would
be to add more enzyme or increase the temperature.
concentration of substrate
Figure 3 Effect of substrate
concentration on the rate of an enzyme-
controlled reaction. The rate of reaction
increases as the substrate concentration
increases up to a maximum rate, V
Max
If the concentration of the enzyme is increased more active sites are
available so the reaction rate can rise towards a higher Vmay. The
concentration of substrate becomes the limiting factor again and
increasing this will once again allow the reaction rate to rise until the
new Vmax is reached.
Investigations into the effects of different factors on enzyme activity a
Investigating the effects of different factors on enzyme
activity provides an insight into how enzymes work.
Catalase is an enzyme present in plant tissue and animal
tissue, making it a good choice for use in investigations
because it is readily available. Catalase catalyses the
breakdown of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen.
The volume of oxygen gas collected in a set length of time
can be used as a measure of the rate of reaction.
In the second experiment the liver was boiled for
five minutes before being placed in the hydrogen
peroxide solution.
The graph below shows the results from the experiment.
liver
catalase
syringe -
oxygen released
boiling tube
conical flask
bubbles
of oxygen
---------- boiled liver
1
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN
hydrogen peroxide
0
5
20
25
10 15
time (s)
water
-trough
A Figure 4 Apparatus used to collect oxygen released when catalase reacts with
hydrogen peroxide
A student conducted a series of experiments to determine
1 Explain why the student used liver tissue.
the effect of temperature on enzymes.
2 Show the chemical reaction that occurs resulting
in the release of oxygen.
In the first experiment, using apparatus similar to that
3 Explain the shape of the graph.
shown in the diagram above, liver tissue was put into
4 Describe and explain what has happened in the
hydrogen peroxide solution and the volume of oxygen
second experiment.
released every five seconds was measured.
ENZYMES
101
4.4 Cofactors, coenzymes, and
prosthetic groups
Specification reference: 2.1.4
The difference between cofactors and coenzymes
Some enzymes need a non-protein 'helper' component in order to
carry out their function as biological catalysts. They may transfer
atoms or groups from one reaction to another in a multi-step pathway
or they may actually form part of the active site of an enzyme. These
components are called cofactors, or if the cofactor is an organic
molecule it is called a coenzyme.
Inorganic cofactors are obtained via the diet as minerals, including
iron, calcium, chloride, and zinc ions. For example, the enzyme
amylase, which catalyses the breakdown of starch (Topic 4.1, Enzyme
action), contains a chloride ion that is necessary for the formation of a
correctly shaped active site.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the need for coenzymes,
cofactors, and prosthetic
groups in some enzyme-
controlled reactions.
► the role of inactive precursors
Many coenzymes are derived from vitamins, a class of organic molecule
found in the diet. For example, vitamin B3 is used to synthesise NAD
(nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), a coenzyme responsible for the
transfer of hydrogen atoms between molecules involved in respiration.
NADP, which plays a similar role in photosynthesis, is also derived
from vitamin B3.
A Figure 1 A molecular model of the
enzyme alpha amylase, which catalyses
the breakdown of starch
Another example is vitamin B5, which is used to make coenzyme A.
Coenzyme A is essential in the breakdown of fatty acids and
carbohydrates in respiration.
alcohol
dehydrogenase,
NAD+
ethanol
Prosthetic groups
You have previously met prosthetic groups when you learnt about
the globular protein, haemoglobin, in which the prosthetic group is
an iron (Fe) ion. Prosthetic groups also play a role in some enzymes.
Prosthetic groups are similar to cofactors in that they are required by
certain enzymes to carry out their catalytic function, but while cofactors
bind loosely to proteins in order to activate them, prosthetic groups are
tightly bound and form a permanent feature of the protein. For example
zinc ions (Zn2+) form an important part of the structure of carbonic
anhydrase, an enzyme necessary for the metabolism of carbon dioxide.
NADH
Precursor activation
Many enzymes are produced in an inactive form, known as inactive
precursor enzymes, particularly enzymes that can cause damage
within the cells producing them or to tissues where they are released,
or enzymes whose action needs to be controlled and only activated
under certain conditions.
éthanal
Precursor enzymes often need to undergo a change in shape (tertiary
structure), particularly to the active site, to be activated. This can be
achieved by the addition of a cofactor. Before the cofactor is added,
ethanal, H+, and NADH are
released from the active site
Figure 2 Alcohol dehydrogenase
needs NAD+ to accept hydrogen produced
when ethanal is formed from ethanol
ENZYMES
4.1 Enzyme action
Specification reference: 2.1.4
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the role of enzymes in
catalysing reactions that
affect metabolism at a cellular
and whole organism level
► the role of enzymes in
catalysing both intracellular
and extracellular reactions
► the mechanism of
enzyme action.
Why are enzymes important?
Most of the processes necessary to life involve chemical reactions, and
these reactions need to happen very fast. In the laboratory or in industry
this would demand very high temperatures and pressures. These
extreme conditions are not possible in living cells - they would damage
the cell components. Instead, the reactions are catalysed by enzymes.
Enzymes are biological catalysts. They are globular proteins that
interact with substrate molecules causing them to react at much faster
rates without the need for harsh environmental conditions. Without
enzymes many of the processes necessary to life would not be possible.
Synoptic link
You learned about globular proteins
in Topic 3.7, Types of proteins.
Study tip
Enzymes are often named for the
reaction they are involved in, or
the substrate that they act upon.
Many enzyme names end in 'ase',
but not all. Some enzyme names
indicate both substrate and
function. For example:
The role of enzymes in reactions
Living organisms need to be built and maintained. This involves the
synthesis of large polymer-based components. For example, cellulose
forms the walls of plants cells and long protein molecules form
the contractile filaments of muscles in animals. The different cell
components are synthesised and assembled into cells, which then form
tissues, organs, and eventually the whole organism. The chemical
reactions required for growth are anabolic (building up) reactions and
they are all catalysed by enzymes.
Energy is constantly required for the majority of living processes,
including growth. Energy is released from large organic molecules, like
glucose, in metabolic pathways consisting of many catabolic (breaking
down) reactions. Catabolic reactions are also catalysed by enzymes.
These large organic molecules are obtained from the digestion of food,
made up of even larger organic molecules, like starch. Digestion is also
catalysed by a range of enzymes.
Reactions rarely happen in isolation but as part of multi-step pathways.
Metabolism is the sum of all of the different reactions and reaction
pathways happening in a cell or an organism, and it can only happen
as a result of the control and order imposed by enzymes.
Just like reactions in a laboratory, the speed at which different cellular
reactions proceed varies considerably and is usually dependent on
environmental conditions. The temperature, pressure, and pH may all
have an effect on the rate of a chemical reaction. Enzymes can only
increase the rates of reaction up to a certain point called the Vmax
(maximum initial velocity or rate of the enzyme-catalysed reaction).
Phosphorylases catalyse the
addition of a phosphate groups
to molecules.
Lactate dehydrogenase
catalyses the transfer
of a hydrogen ion to and
from lactate.
Pepsins catalyse the
breakdown of proteins
(peptides) in the stomach.
ATPase uses ATP as its substrate.
Mechanism of enzyme action
Molecules in a solution move and collide randomly. For a reaction to
happen, molecules need to collide in the right orientation. When high
temperatures and pressures are applied the speed of the molecules will
84
4.4 Cofactors, coenzymes, and prosthetic groups
Synoptic link
the precursor protein is called an apoenzyme. When the cofactor is
added and the enzyme is activated, it is called a holoenzyme.
substrate –
You will learn about NAD and
coenzyme Ain cellular respiration
in more depth in Chapter 18,
Respiration.
coenzyme
Synoptic link
You learnt about prosthetic groups
in proteins in Topic 3.6, Structure of
proteins.
apoenzyme
inactive
cofactor
activator
holoenzyme
active
A Figure 3 Coenzymes, or cofactors, are often needed to produce the specific shape of
the active site
Sometimes the change in tertiary structure is brought about by the
action of another enzyme, such as a protease, which cleaves certain
bonds in the molecule. In some cases a change in conditions, such
as pH or temperature, results in a change in tertiary structure and
activates a precursor enzyme. These types of precursor enzymes are
called zymogens or proenzymes.
When inactive pepsinogen is released into the stomach to digest
proteins, the acid pH brings about the transformation into the active
enzyme pepsin. This adaptation protects the body tissues against the
digestive action of pepsin.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about blood
clotting in Topic 12.5, Non-specific
animal defences against pathogens.
Enzyme activation and the blood-clotting
mechanism
Blood clotting, or coagulation, is an important biological response to tissue
damage. The blood-clotting process only begins when platelets aggregate at
the site of tissue damage. The aggregated platelets release clotting factors,
including factor X.
Summary questions
1 Describe two ways in which
cofactors are necessary
for the catalytic role
of some enzymes. (2 marks)
Factor X is an important component in the blood-clotting mechanism.
It is an enzyme that is dependent on the cofactor vitamin K for activation.
Activated factor X catalyses the conversion of prothrombin into the enzyme
thrombin by cleaving certain bonds in the molecule, thus altering its
tertiary structure. Thrombin is a protease and catalyses the conversion
of soluble fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin fibres. Fibrin molecules, together
with platelets, form a blood clot.
2 Explain, using an appropriate
example of each, how
prosthetic groups are different
from coenzymes. (4 marks)
This series of successive enzyme activations in blood clotting is called the
coagulation cascade.
3 Using blood clotting as
your example, explain
the different ways in
which enzymes can
be activated. (4 marks)
1 Explain the importance of enzyme activation in controlling
blood clotting
98
4
4.1 Enzyme action
and water quickly, therefore preventing its accumulation. It is found in
both plant and animal tissues.
Extracellular enzymes
All of the reactions happening within cells need substrates (raw materials)
to make products needed by the organism. These raw materials need to
be constantly supplied to cells to keep up with the demand. Nutrients
(components necessary for survival and growth) present in the diet or
environment of the organism supply these materials.
Nutrients are often in the form of polymers such as proteins and
polysaccharides. These large molecules cannot enter cells directly
through the cell-surface membrane. They need to be broken down
into smaller components first.
Enzymes are released from cells to break down these large nutrient
molecules into smaller molecules in the process of digestion. These
enzymes are called extracellular enzymes. They work outside the cell
that made them. In some organisms, for example fungi, they work
outside the body.
hyphae
Both single-celled and multicellular
organisms rely on extracellular
enzymes to make use of polymers for
nutrition.
Single-celled organisms, such as
bacteria and yeast, release enzymes
into their immediate environment.
nuclei
The enzymes break down larger
enzymes
molecules, such as proteins, and the
soluble products
secreted
smaller molecules produced, such as
absorbed
digestion
amino acids and glucose, are then
absorbed by the cells.
A Figure 2 Cells in fungal hyphae synthesise enzymes that are secreted
Many multicellular organisms eat
outside the cell. The enzymes breakdown organic matter, so it can be absorbed
food to gain nutrients. Although
and used for growth
the nutrients are taken into the
digestive system the large molecules still have to be digested so smaller
molecules can be absorbed into the bloodstream. From there they
are transported around the body to be used as substrates in cellular
reactions. Examples of extracellular enzymes involved in digestion in
humans are amylase and trypsin.
Synoptic link
You learnt about starch in
Topic 3.3, Carbohydrates.
Digestion of starch
The digestion of starch begins in the mouth and continues in the
small intestine. Starch is digested in two steps, involving two different
enzymes. Different enzymes are needed because each enzyme only
catalyses one specific reaction.
1
Starch polymers are partially broken down into maltose, which is
a disaccharide. The enzyme involved in this stage is called amylase.
Amylase is produced by the salivary glands and the pancreas. It is
released in saliva into the mouth, and in pancreatic juice into the
small intestine.
86
Chapter 4 Practice questions
c
5
Identify which curve on the graph below
demonstrates competitive inhibition
giving the reasons for your choice.
(1 mark)
Figure 4 shows the results that the student
obtained from a practical procedure in
which the rate of formation of maltose was
measured in the presence and absence of
chloride ions.
maximum rate
of reaction
chloride ions
present
rate of reaction
substrate concentration
concentration of maltose (%)
chloride ions
absent
1
2
time (min)
a
d (i) Explain why end product inhibitors
have to be both reversible and
competitive
(3 marks)
(ii) Explain why end product enzyme
inhibition is essential for the control
of cellular activity.
(3 marks)
4 Amylase is an enzyme that hydrolyses
amylose to maltose. Maltose, like glucose, is a
reducing sugar.
A student investigated the action of amylase
on amylose. She mixed amylase with amylose
and placed the mixture in a water bath.
Describe how she could measure the change
in concentration of maltose (reducing sugar)
as the reaction proceeds.
In you answer, you should ensure that the steps in
the procedure are sequenced correctly (7 marks)
OCR F212 2011
Describe the effect of chloride ions on the
rate of reaction.
(2 marks)
OCR F212 2011
b
State three variables that need to be
controlled in this practical procedure in
order to produce valid results.
(3 marks)
OCR F212 2011
100
ENZYMES
Practice questions
1 Compounds containing some metal ions
such as lead, mercury, copper or silver are
poisonous. This is because ions of these
metals are non-competitive inhibitors of
several enzymes.
Other metal ions are required for enzymes to
function. Magnesium ions, for example, are
required by DNA polymerase.
Which of the following statements correctly
describes the nature and function of
magnesium ions?
Statement 1: minerals and coenzymes
Statement 2: vitamins and cofactors
Statement 3: minerals and cofactors
Statement 4: vitamins and coenzymes
(1 mark)
2 a Describe what is happening at the points
labelled on the graph below. You should
use the terms active site, substrate and
enzyme substrate complex in your
answer.
(5 marks)
(iii) Explain why maltase, not amylase,
hydrolyses maltose completing the
digestion of starch.
(3 marks)
(iv) Explain why amylase stops working
in the stomach.
(4 marks)
The acid stomach contents are neutralised
by alkaline pancreatic juice in the small
intestine.
Suggest why this is necessary to ensure
digestion of maltose.
(3 marks)
d Explain what is meant by the term Vmax
with respect to enzymes. (3 marks)
a State the type of monomers that make up
proteins.
(1 mark)
Malonate inhibits cellular respiration.
Hans Krebs added malonate to minced
pigeon muscle tissue when trying to
work out the different steps in Krebs
cycle, a series of reactions that occur in
respiration.
3
COO
CH
succinate
O0C —C
H
CH2
dehydrogenase
H
—
C—
C00
succinate
fumarate
rate of reaction
COO
CH2
succinate
dehydrogenase
no reaction
C00
malonate
concentration of substrate
In step 6 of Krebs cycle, succinate
dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidation of
succinate to fumarate.
Explain why malonate inhibits this
reaction.
(4 marks)
Amylase catalyses the hydrolysis of
starch to maltose in the mouth. Amylase
stops working as the food passes into
the stomach. Maltase then catalyses the
hydrolysis of maltose into glucose in the
small intestine.
(i) State which group of biological
molecules amylase and maltase
belong to.
(1 mark)
(ii) Describe the meaning of the term
hydrolysis.
(2 marks)
b
ENZYMES
increase, therefore so will the number of successful collisions and the
overall rate of reaction.
Many different enzymes are produced by living organisms, as each
enzyme catalyses one biochemical reaction, of which there are thousands
in any given cell. This is termed the specificity of the enzyme.
Energy needs to be supplied for most reactions to start. This is called
the activation energy. Sometimes, the amount of energy needed is so
large it prevents the reaction from happening under normal conditions.
Enzymes help the molecules collide successfully, and therefore reduce
the activation energy required. There are two hypotheses for how
enzymes do this.
Lock and key hypothesis
An area within the tertiary structure of the enzyme has a shape that is
complementary to the shape of a specific substrate molecule. This area
is called the active site.
substrate
molecule
product
molecules
active
In the same way that only the right key will fit into a lock, only a
specific substrate will 'fit' the active site of an enzyme. This is the
lock and key hypothesis.
active site free
to accept another
substrate molecule
site 7
When the substrate is bound to the active site an enzyme-substrate
complex is formed. The substrate or substrates then react and the
product or products are formed in an enzyme-product complex.
The product or products are then released, leaving the enzyme
unchanged and able to take part in subsequent reactions.
enzyme
molecule
enzyme
molecule
The substrate is held in such a way by the enzyme that the right
atom-groups are close enough to react. The R-groups within the
active site of the enzyme will also interact with the substrate, forming
temporary bonds. These put strain on the bonds within the substrate,
which also helps the reaction along.
enzyme
enzyme-
enzyme
substrate
substrate complex
products
A Figure 1 The substrate fits into the
active site of the enzyme forming
the enzyme-substrate complex where
the reaction takes place and the
products are released
Study tip
The substrate should be described
as having a complementary shape to
its active site, not the same shape.
Induced-fit hypothesis
More recently, evidence from research into enzyme action suggests
the active site of the enzyme actually changes shape slightly as the
substrate enters. This is called the induced-fit hypothesis and is a
modified version of the lock and key hypothesis. The initial interaction
between the enzyme and substrate is relatively weak, but these weak
interactions rapidly induce changes in the enzyme's tertiary structure
that strengthen binding, putting strain on the substrate molecule. This
can weaken a particular bond or bonds in the substrate, therefore
lowering the activation energy for the reaction.
Intracellular enzymes
Enzymes have an essential role in both the structure and the function of
cells and whole organisms. The synthesis of polymers from monomers,
for example making polysaccharides from glucose, requires enzymes.
Enzymes that act within cells are called intracellular enzymes.
Hydrogen peroxide is a toxic product of many metabolic pathways. The
enzyme catalase ensures hydrogen peroxide is broken down to oxygen
ENZYMES
change in shape of an active site for it to no longer be complementary to
its substrate. This happens to all of the enzyme molecules at about the
same temperature so the loss of activity is relatively abrupt. At this point
in an enzyme-controlled reaction the temperature coefficient, Quo does not
apply any more as the enzymes have denatured.
The decrease in the rate of reaction below the optimum temperature
is less rapid. This is because the enzymes have not denatured, they are
just less active.
Temperature extremes
The majority of living organisms have evolved to cope with living within a
certain temperature range. Some organisms can also cope with extremes.
Examples of extremely cold environments are deep oceans, high
altitudes, and polar regions. The enzymes controlling the metabolic
activities of organisms living in these environments need to be adapted
to the cold. Enzymes adapted to the cold tend to have more flexible
structures, particularly at the active site, making them less stable than
enzymes that work at higher temperatures. Smaller temperature
changes will denature them.
Thermophiles are organisms adapted to living in very hot environments
such as hot springs and deep sea hydrothermal vents. The enzymes
present in these organisms are more stable than other enzymes due to
the increased number of bonds, particularly hydrogen bonds and sulfur
bridges, in their tertiary structures. The shapes of these enzymes, and
their active sites, are more resistant to change as the temperature rises.
Enzymes in action
Siamese cats provide visual evidence of the effect
of temperature on enzyme activity. Tyrosinase
is an enzyme responsible for catalysing the
production of melanin, the pigment responsible for
dark coloured fur. Due to a mutation, Siamese cats
produce a form of the enzyme tyrosinase that is
denatured and therefore inactive at normal body
temperature meaning that their fur is primarily
white or cream coloured. The extremities of these
cats - the tails, ears, and limbs - are at a slightly
lower temperature, too low to denature mutant
tyrosinase. This leads to the distinctive point coloration of these cats as
melanin is produced in these areas.
Study tip
1 Suggest why Siamese kittens are born completely white.
Remember that enzymes are
denatured not killed'.
pH
Proteins, and so enzymes, are also affected by changes in pH. Hydrogen
bonds and ionic bonds between amino acid R-groups hold proteins
in their precise three-dimensional shape. These bonds result from
A denatured protein is still a
protein - it just has a different
shape and can no longer function
as it normally would
89
ENZYMES
there will be so much more substrate than inhibitor that the original
Vmax can still be reached.
Examples of competitive inhibition
Statins are competitive inhibitors of an enzyme used in the synthesis
of cholesterol. Statins are regularly prescribed to help people reduce
blood cholesterol concentration. High blood cholesterol levels can
result in heart disease.
Aspirin irreversibly inhibits the active site of COX enzymes, preventing
the synthesis of prostaglandins and thromboxane, the chemicals
responsible for producing pain and fever.
Non-competitive inhibition
Non-competitive inhibition works in the following way:
substrate
•
The inhibitor binds to the enzyme at a location other than the
active site. This alternative site is called an allosteric site.
The binding of the inhibitor causes the tertiary structure of the
enzyme to change, meaning the active site changes shape.
This results in the active site no longer having a complementary
shape to the substrate so it is unable to bind to the enzyme.
The enzyme cannot carry out its function and it is said to be inhibited.
enzyme
non-competitive inhibitor
changes shape of enzyme
so it cannot bind to substrate
As the inhibitor does not compete with the substrate for the active site
it is called a non-competitive inhibitor.
Effect on rates of reaction
Increasing the concentration of enzyme or substrate will not overcome
the effect of a non-competitive inhibitor. Increasing the concentration
of inhibitor, however, will decrease the rate of reaction further as
more active sites become unavailable.
A Figure 2 Non-competitive inhibition.
The inhibitor binds to an allosteric site on
the enzyme, changing the shape of the
active site. This means the substrate can
no longer bind the active site
Vmax
—
—
—
Examples of irreversible non-competitive inhibitors
As mentioned, the binding of the inhibitor may be reversible or
non-reversible. Irreversible inhibitors cannot be removed from the
part of the enzyme they are attached to. They are often very toxic,
but not always. Organophosphates used as insecticides and herbicides
irreversibly inhibit the enzyme acetyl cholinesterase, an enzyme
necessary for nerve impulse transmission. This can lead to muscle
cramps, paralysis, and even death if accidentally ingested.
rate of reaction i.e. velocity (v)
absence of fixed quantity
inhibitor
of competitive
inhibitor
fixed quantity of
non-competitive
inhibitor
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are used to treat long-term indigestion.
They irreversibly block an enzyme system responsible for secreting
hydrogen ions into the stomach. This makes PPIs very effective in
reducing the production of excess acid which, if left untreated, can
lead to formation of stomach ulcers.
substrate concentration
A Figure 3 Comparison of competitive
and non-competitive inhibition of an
enzyme-controlled reaction. With a
competitive inhibitor, as the substrate
concentration is increased the effect of
the inhibitor is almost overcome. With a
non-competitive inhibitor, as the substrate
concentration is increased the effect of the
inhibitor is not overcome
End-product inhibition
End-product inhibition is the term used for enzyme inhibition
that occurs when the product of a reaction acts as an inhibitor
to the enzyme that produces it. This serves as a negative feedback
4.3 Enzyme inhibitors
control mechanism for the reaction. Excess products are not made
and resources are not wasted. It is an example of non-competitive
reversible inhibition.
Synoptic link
You learnt about ATP in Topic 3.11,
ATP and you will learn more about
cellular respiration in Chapter 18,
Respiration.
Respiration is a metabolic pathway resulting in the production of ATP.
Glucose is broken down in a number of steps. The first step involves
the addition of two phosphate groups to the glucose molecule. The
addition of the second phosphate group, which results in the initial
breakdown of the glucose molecule, is catalysed by the enzyme
phosphofructokinase (PFK). This enzyme is competitively inhibited by
ATP. ATP therefore regulates its own production.
When the levels of ATP are high, more ATP binds to the allosteric
site on PFK, preventing the addition of the second phosphate
group to glucose. Glucose is not broken down and ATP is not
produced at the same rate.
As ATP is used up, less binds to PFK and the enzyme is able to
catalyse the addition of a second phosphate group to glucose.
Respiration resumes, leading to the production of more ATP.
Summary questions
1 Explain why a non-competitive inhibitor does not need to
have a similar shape to a substrate molecule.
(3 marks)
2 Explain why increasing the concentration of substrate will
never produce the Vay of a reaction after the addition of
a non-competitive inhibitor.
max
(2 marks)
3 End-product inhibition is likely to be competitive rather
than non-competitive. Suggest reasons for this, and give
an example of end-product inhibition.
(4 marks)
Ethylene glycol present in antifreeze is poisonous when ingested.
Ethylene glycol is oxidised using the same enzymes used to
oxidise ethanol (alcohol). The products made during the
breakdown of ethylene glycol, rather than ethylene glycol itself,
are responsible for the toxic effects. Ethylene glycol is able to
leave the body unchanged in urine.
Suggest why ethanol is often used in emergency
departments as an antidote to antifreeze poisoning.
(6 marks)
96
4
4.2 Factors affecting enzyme activity
interactions between the polar and charged R-groups present on the
amino acids forming the primary structure. A change in pH refers
to a change in hydrogen ion concentration. More hydrogen ions are
present in low pH (acid) environments and fewer hydrogen ions are
present in high pH (alkaline) environments.
Study tip
Different enzymes in different
organisms also have a whole range
of optimum pHs from very acid to
very alkaline.
The active site will only be in the right shape at a certain hydrogen ion
concentration. This is the optimum pH for any particular enzyme.
When the pH changes from the optimum - becoming more acidic or
alkaline - the structure of the enzyme, and therefore the active site, is
altered. However, if the pH returns to the optimum then the protein
will resume its normal shape and catalyse the reaction again. This is
called renaturation.
optimum pH
rate of enzyme activity
When the pH changes more significantly (beyond a certain
pH) the structure of the enzyme is irreversibly altered and
the active site will no longer be complementary to the
substrate. The enzyme is now said to be denatured and
substrates can no longer bind to the active sites. This will
reduce the rate of reaction.
Hydrogen ions interact with polar and charged R-groups.
Changing the concentration of hydrogen ions therefore
changes the degree of this interaction. The interaction of
pH
R-groups with hydrogen ions also affects the interaction
Figure 2 Effect of pH on the rate of an enzyme-
of R-groups with each other.
controlled reaction. The rate of reaction decreases as the
pH moves away from the optimum, becoming higher or
The more hydrogen ions present (low pH), the less
lower. Note how this graph is symmetrical, unlike the graph
the R-groups are able to interact with each other. This
showing rate of reaction against temperature. It shows leads to bonds breaking and the shape of the enzyme
reversible reduction in enzyme activity as the pH moves changing. The reverse is true when fewer hydrogen
away from the optimum
ions (high pH) are present. This means the shape of
an enzyme will change as the pH changes and therefore it will only
function within a narrow pH range. Table 1 shows the pH conditions
under which the various enzymes of the human digestive system
function. These are the optimum pHs for these enzymes.
Table 1 The action of different enzymes at various points in the digestive system
Site of action
Enzymes
Function
Saliva
mouth/throat
pH
neutral (pH 7-8)
acidic (pH 1-2)
amylase
starch
maltose
Gastric juice
stomach
pepsin
proteins + polypeptides
Pancreatic juice
small intestine/
duodenum
slightly alkaline
(pH 8)
trypsin
lipase
amylase
maltase
proteins + polypeptides
triglycerides glycerol + fatty acids
starch + maltose
maltose glucose
Substrate and enzyme concentration
When the concentration of substrate is increased the number of
substrate molecules, atoms, or ions in a particular area or volume
increases. The increased number of substrate particles leads to
90
4.3 Enzyme inhibitors
Specification reference: 2.1.4
As you have seen, it is important that cellular conditions such as pH
and temperature are kept within narrow limits so that enzyme activity
is not delayed. This ensures that reactions can happen at a rate fast
enough to sustain living processes, for example, respiration.
:
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the effects of inhibitors on
the rate of enzyme-controlled
reactions.
It is also important that reactions do not happen too fast as this could
lead to the build-up of excess products. Living processes rarely involve
just one reaction but are complex, multi-step reaction pathways. These
pathways need to be closely regulated to meet the needs of living
organisms without wasting resources.
Control of metabolic activity within cells
The different steps in reaction pathways are controlled by different
enzymes. Controlling the activity of enzymes at crucial points in these
pathways regulates the rate and quantity of product formation.
Enzymes can be activated with cofactors, (Topic 4.4 Cofactors,
coenzymes, and prosthetic groups), or inactivated with inhibitors.
Inhibitors are molecules that prevent enzymes from carrying out their
normal function of catalysis (or slow them down). There are two types
of enzyme inhibition - competitive and non-competitive.
Competitive inhibition
Competitive inhibition works in the following way:
competitive inhibitor
interferes with active
site of enzyme so
substrate cannot bind
substrate
enzyme
A molecule or part of a molecule that has a similar shape to the
substrate of an enzyme can fit into the active site of the enzyme.
This blocks the substrate from entering the active site, preventing
the enzyme from catalysing the reaction.
The enzyme cannot carry out its function and is said to be inhibited.
The non-substrate molecule that binds to the active site is a type of
inhibitor. Substrate and inhibitor molecules present in a solution
will compete with each other to bind to the active sites of the
enzymes catalysing the reaction. This will reduce the number of
substrate molecules binding to active sites in a given time and slows
down the rate of reaction. For this reason such inhibitors are called
competitive inhibitors and the degree of inhibition will depend
on the relative concentrations of substrate, inhibitor, and enzyme.
Figure 1 Competitive inhibition. The
shape of the inhibitor is similar in shape
to the part of the substrate that binds to
the active site. This means the inhibitor
can temporarily bind to the active site and
block the substrate from binding
Study tip
Most competitive inhibitors only bind temporarily to the active site
of the enzyme, so their effect is reversible. However there are some
exceptions such as aspirin.
When describing a competitive
inhibitor, do not say that it has
the same shape as the substrate.
It has a similar shape to part of or
all of the substrate.
Effect on rates of reaction
A competitive inhibitor reduces the rate of reaction for a given
concentration of substrate, but it does not change the Vimax of the
enzyme it inhibits. If the substrate concentration is increased enough
94
4.2 Factors affecting enzyme activity
Specification reference: 2.1.4
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the effects of pH, temperature,
enzyme concentration and
substrate concentration on
enzyme activity
practical investigations
into factors effecting
enzyme activity.
For enzymes to catalyse a reaction, they must come into contact
with the substrate, and the enzyme must be the right shape
(complementary) for the substrate. Enzymes are complex proteins and
their structure can be affected by factors such as temperature and pH.
These can cause changes in the shape of their active site. Enzymes are
more likely to come into contact with the substrate if temperature and
substrate concentration are increased.
.
.
.
Factors affecting enzyme action can be investigated by measuring the
rate of the reactions they catalyse.
-->>
.
.
Temperature
Increasing the temperature of a reaction environment increases the
kinetic energy of the particles. As temperature increases, the particles
move faster and collide more frequently. In an enzyme-controlled
reaction an increase in temperature will result in more frequent
successful collisions between substrate and enzyme. This leads to an
increase in the rate of reaction.
The temperature coefficient, Qo, of a reaction (or process) is a
measure of how much the rate of a reaction increases with a 10°C rise
in temperature. For enzyme-controlled reactions this is usually taken
as two, which means that the rate of reaction doubles with a 10°C
temperature increase.
Denaturation from temperature
As enzymes are proteins their structure is affected by temperature.
At higher temperatures the bonds holding the protein together vibrate
more. As the temperature increases the vibrations increase until the
bonds strain and then break. The breaking of these bonds results in a
change in the precise tertiary structure of the protein. The enzyme has
changed shape and is said to have been denatured.
When an enzyme is denatured the active site changes shape and is no
longer complementary to the substrate. The substrate can no longer fit
into the active sites and the enzyme will no longer function as a catalyst.
rate of a reaction
optimum
temperature
Optimum temperature
The optimum temperature is the temperature at which the enzyme
has the highest rate of activity. The optimum temperature of enzymes
can vary significantly. Many enzymes in the human body have
optimum temperatures of around 40°C, meanwhile thermophilic
bacteria (found in hot springs) have enzymes with optimum
temperatures of 70°C, and psychrophilic organisms (that live in areas
that are cold such as the antarctic and arctic regions) have enzymes
with optimum temperatures below 5 °C.
temperature/°C
A Figure 1 The rate of reaction increases
up to the optimum temperature and then
decreases rapidly
Once the enzymes have denatured above the optimum temperature,
the decrease in rate of reaction is rapid. There only needs to be a slight
88
ENZYMES
2 Maltose is then broken down into glucose, which
is a monosaccharide. The enzyme involved in this
Stage is called maltase. Maltase is present in the small
intestine.
tongue
salivary glands
oesophagus
Glucose is small enough to be absorbed by the cells lining
the digestive system and subsequently absorbed into the
bloodstream.
lobe of liver
transverse limb
of the large
intestine
ascending limb-
of large intestine
(colon)
Digestion of proteins
Trypsin is a protease, a type of enzyme that catalyses
the digestion of proteins into smaller peptides, which
can then be broken down further into amino acids by
other proteases. Trypsin is produced in the pancreas
and released with the pancreatic juice into the small
intestine, where it acts on proteins. The amino acids that
are produced by the action of proteases are absorbed by
the cells lining the digestive system and then absorbed
into the bloodstream.
stomach
pancreas
descending
limb of the
large intestine
(colon)
small intestine
Cileum)
rectum
anus
Figure 3 Human digestive system
Summary questions
1 a State the type of biological molecule used to form enzymes. (1 mark)
b Name the monomers that form this biological molecule. (1 mark)
c Describe how the structure(s) of this biological molecule
determines enzyme activity.
(4 marks)
Synoptic link
You learnt about the structure
of proteins in Topic 3.6, Structure
of proteins.
2 Explain how catabolism and anabolism are related to metabolism. (3 marks)
3 There are two theories explaining enzyme substrate interaction.
The lock and key model and induced fit model of enzyme action.
a Explain what is meant by the term model in the sentence
above.
(2 marks)
b Explain how the following terms are relevant to each of the models.
complementary, flexibility, R group interactions, bond strain (4 marks)
energy
The transition state model 1
adds more detail to the
reaction without
enzyme
activation energy
induced fit model, in the
activation without enzyme
same way that the induced
energy
-------- ----with-----
fit model was more detailed
reaction
enzyme
than the original lock and Catalysed by
key model.
enzyme
All reactions go through a
time
transition state as the different chemical components interact with each
other. The formation of this transition sate determines the activation
energy of the reaction.
a Explain the meaning of the term activation energy. (2 marks)
b Explain the energy changes occurring resulting in the
transition state model (the red line).
(4 marks)
Discuss why the models of enzyme action have
changed over time.
(4 marks)
ENZYMES
ITU
+9ml
+9ml
+9ml
+9ml
or potato can be ground down to make a solution. The
solution will contain catalase released from cells. Serial
dilution of this solution will produce a range of solutions
with different relative concentrations of catalase. The
effect of the different concentrations on the rate of
reaction can be investigated by adding equal volumes
of a given concentration of hydrogen peroxide to each
solution.
1 You are provided with a stock solution of enzyme
X with a concentration of 20 mmol/dm . Explain
how you would prepare a range of five solutions
with different concentrations of enzyme X using
the stock solution. Show your working and state
the concentrations produced.
full dilution 1/10 1/10 01/10 001/10
strength of stock (1/100) (1/1000) (1/10000)
stock solution
A Figure 5 This figure shows how a serial dilution might
be set up. Adding 1 ml of stock solution to 9 ml of distilled
water gives 10 ml of dilute solution in which there is 1 ml
stock/10 ml hence a 1/10 or 10 fold dilution. This step is
repeated a number of times to give a serial dilution.
Summary questions
1 Explain the term 'denatured with reference to enzymes.
(3 marks)
2 The graph below shows the optimum pHs of three enzymes.
rate of a reaction
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
pH
Pepsin is an enzyme that, along with stomach acid, digests proteins
in the stomach.
State which of the curves, A,B or C, is likely to represent
the activity of the enzyme pepsin over a range of pHs.
Explain the reasons for your choice.
(2 marks)
3 Bacteria that colonise hydrothermal vents, where temperatures
are very high, have enzymes with very high optimum temperatures.
Suggest why these bacteria are unlikely to cause infections
in humans.
(3 marks)
4 Enzymes with very low optimum temperatures tend to have
quite flexible structures. Using your knowledge of collision
theory, explain why this flexibility is necessary.
(6 marks)
