5.5 Osmosis
Table 2 Osmosis in a plant cell
Higher (less negative)
Equal
Lower (more negative)
Water potential (Y)
of external solution
compared to cell solution
Net movement of water
Enters cell
Leaves cell
Water constantly enters and
leaves, but at equal rates
No change
Condition of protoplast
Swells and becomes turgid
Plasmolysis, contents shrink
protoplast pushed
against cell wall
protoplast beginning to pull
away from the cell wall
protoplast completely pulled
away from the cell wall
nucleus
space
filled
with external
solution
of lower
water potentia
cellulose
cell wall
protoplast
Osmosis investigations ?
Final
mass
Difference
in mass
% mass
change
Sugar
concentration
mol dm-3
0.0
The effect of solutions with different water
potentials can be observed in both plant
and animal cells.
Original
mass
(g)
3.0
Mean %
mass
change
4.0
3.0
4.1
4.2
0.1
3.3
3.0
3.2
2.9
Plant cells
Pieces of potato or onion can be placed
into sugar or salt solutions with different
concentrations, and therefore different
water potentials. Water will move into
or out of cells depending on the water
potential of the solution relative to the
water potential of the plant tissue. As the
plant tissue gains or loses water it will
increase or decrease in mass and size, and
vice versa.
0.3
3.0
2.9
3.2
3.2
3.5
3.6
3.3
3.0
3.0
3.2
2.8
2.6
2.7
2.2
2.4
2.0
0.5
3.0
0.7
A student used potato cores and their
knowledge of osmosis to investigate the
water potential of potato cells.
The following results were obtained.
3.1
3.1
3.3
3.0
1 Copy and complete the table to show final masses, percentage mass changes and mean percentage changes.
2 Plot a graph of the results.
3 Describe and explain the shape of the graph.
4 Write a short evaluation using the information given and suggest any improvements to the investigation.
116
PLASMA MEMBRANES
5.1 The structure and function
of membranes
Specification reference: 2.1.5
You learnt about the structure of cells in Chapter 2, Basic components
of living systems. Membranes are the structures that separate the
contents of cells from their environment. They also separate the
different areas within cells (organelles) from each other and the
cytosol. Some organelles are divided further by internal membranes.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the roles of membranes within
cells and at the surface of cells
the fluid mosaic model of
membrane structure and the
roles of its components.
The formation of separate membrane-bound areas in a cell is called
compartmentalisation. Compartmentalisation is vital to a cell as
metabolism includes many different and often incompatible reactions.
Containing reactions in separate parts of the cell allows the specific
conditions required for cellular reactions, such as chemical gradients,
to be maintained, and protects vital cell components.
Synoptic link
You will learn about the importance
of chemical gradients in biological
processes, including gas exchange
in mammals and fish in Topic 72,
Mammalian gaseous exchange
system and Topic 7.4 Ventilation and
gas exchange in other organisms).
You will learn about the transport
of oxygen in the blood in Topic 8.1,
Transport systems in multicellular
animals and about translocation in
plants in Topic 9.4, Translocation.
Membrane structure
All the membranes in a cell have the same basic structure. The
cell surface membrane which separates the cell from its external
environment is known as the plasma membrane.
Membranes are formed from a phospholipid bilayer. The hydrophilic
phosphate heads of the phospholipids form both the inner and
outer surface of a membrane, sandwiching the fatty acid tails of the
phospholipids to form a hydrophobic core inside the membrane.
Cells normally exist in aqueous environments. The inside of cells
and organelles are also usually aqueous environments. Phospholipid
bilayers are perfectly suited as membranes because the outer surfaces
of the hydrophilic phosphate heads can interact with water.
Synoptic link
000000000000000000000000-hydrophillic
In Chapter 13, Neuronal
communication you will learn about
the role of chemical gradients in
neuronal communication and in
Chapter 18, Respiration, the role of
gradients in respiration.
phosphate
head
hydrophobic
core
phospholipid
bilayer
1000000000000000000000000
Figure 1 Phospholipids arranged in a double layer forming a hydrophobic core
Synoptic link
You learnt about phospholipids
and how they interact in aqueous
environments to form bilayers in
Topic 3.5, Lipids.
Cell membrane theory
Membranes were seen for the first time following the invention of
electron microscopy, which allowed images to be taken with higher
magnification and resolution. Images taken in the 1950s showed the
102
PLASMA MEMBRANES
If an animal cell is placed in a solution that has a lower water potential
than the cytoplasm it will lose water to the solution by osmosis down
the water potential gradient. This will cause a reduction in the volume
of the cell and the cell-surface membrane to 'pucker', referred to as
crenation (Figure 2).
To prevent either cytolysis or crenation, multicellular animals usually
have control mechanisms to make sure their cells are continuously
surrounded by aqueous solutions with an equal water potential
(isotonic). In blood the aqueous solution is blood plasma.
Table 1 Osmosis in a red blood cell
Higher (less negative)
Equal
Lower (more negative)
Water potential (Y)
of external solution
compared to cell solution
Net movement of water
Enters cell
Leaves cell
Water constantly enters and
leaves, but at equal rates
No change
State of cell
Swells and bursts
Shrinks
contents, including
haemoglobin, are released
haemoglobin is more
concentrated, giving cell
a darker appearance
normal red blood cell
cell shrunken
and shrivelled
remains of cell
surface membrane
Plant cells
Like animal cells, plant cells contain a variety of solutes,
mainly dissolved in a large vacuole. However, unlike animals,
plants are unable to control the water potential of the fluid
around them, for example, the roots are usually surrounded
by almost pure water.
Plants cells have strong cellulose walls surrounding the cell-
surface membrane. When water enters by osmosis the increased
hydrostatic pressure pushes the membrane against the rigid cell
walls. This pressure against the cell wall is called turgor. As the Figure 2 Scanning electron micrograph of a red
turgor pressure increases it resists the entry of further water and blood cell that has been placed in a solution of lower
the cell is said to be turgid.
water potential than the cytoplasm and become
crenated by osmosis (* 5000 magnification)
When plant cells are placed in a solution with a lower water
potential than their own, water is lost from the cells by osmosis.
This leads to a reduction in the volume of the cytoplasm, which
eventually pulls the cell-surface membrane away from the cell
wall – the cell is said to be plasmolysed.
115
PLASMA MEMBRANES
membrane as two black parallel lines - supporting an earlier theory
that membranes were composed of a lipid bilayer.
In 1972 American scientists Singer and Nicolson proposed a model,
building upon an earlier lipid-bilayer model, in which proteins occupy
various positions in the membrane. The model is known as the fluid-
mosaic model because the phospholipids are free to move within
the layer relative to each other (they are fluid), giving the membrane
flexibility, and because the proteins embedded in the bilayer vary in
shape, size, and position in the same way as the tiles of a mosaic).
This model forms the basis of our understanding of membranes today.
Study tip
The movement of the
phospholipids in a membrane
causes the movement of the other
components.
A closer look at cell membrane components
Plasma membranes contain various proteins and lipids – the type and
number of which are particular to each cell type.
glycolipid - acts as a recognition
glycoprotein - branching carbohydrate
site, e.g., for cholera toxins
portion of a protein which acts as a
cholesterol - for stability/flexibility
recognition site for chemicals, e.g., hormones
pore
hydrophilic
heads of
protein phospholipid
molecule molecules
lying on
- point outwards
the surface
(extrinsic protein)
protein
hydrophobic tails
molecule of phospholipid
partly
molecules
ernbedded - point inwards
(extrinsic protein)
protein molecule
spanning the
phospholipid layer
(intrinsic protein)
A Figure 2 The fluid-mosaic model of a plasma membrane showing the many
components, including cholesterol, glycolipids and glycoproteins, and membrane proteins
Study tip
The components of plasma membranes play an important role in the
functions of the membrane and the cell or organelle they are part of.
Membrane proteins
Membrane proteins have important roles in the various functions
of membranes. There are two types of proteins in the cell-surface
membrane - intrinsic and extrinsic proteins.
Always use the term cell-surface or
plasma membrane when referring
to membranes that enclose cells in
order to distinguish them from the
membranes that form organelles.
103
PLASMA MEMBRANES
Animal cells
Eggs can be used to demonstrate osmosis in animal
cells. A chicken's egg is not exactly a single cell, but
with the shell removed a single membrane-bound
structure remains and it will behave in the same
way as a cell when placed in solutions of varying
water potentials.
To investigate osmosis, eggs without their shells are
placed in different concentrations of sugar syrup. Over
time, osmosis takes place and there will have been a net
movement of water into or out of the eggs, depending on
the concentration of the syrup they were in. (Note that
if the egg is hard boiled for easier handling that this will
damage the membrane.)
Summary questions
1 Copy the diagram below and use arrows to show the net movement of water.
(2 marks)
partially permeable
membrane
pure water
(V = 0 kPa) |
dilute solution
(V-200 kPa)
V concentrated solution
(V = -500 kPa)
0 1°
0
0
0
ooo olo oo oo
OOO O OOO
ooo qoo 0 0 0
2 Explain why it is not possible to have a positive water potential.
(2 marks)
3 At which point on the graph in Figure 3 is the water potential of the solution equal to
the water potential of the cells?
(1 mark)
---
--------------
PINE
KERNEL
10
sodium chloride
concentration
/ mol dm-
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
mass o
1
0.2
0.3
0.5
1.0
change
BUTTERNUT
SQUASH
SWEET
POTATO
-CACTUS
Figure 3 Mass changes in plant
tissues bathed in salt solutions
(3 marks)
4 Explain why it is important to keep the concentrations of electrolytes (solutes) in body tissues
at the correct level to ensure proper hydration.
5 Look at Figure 3 again. State which plant tissue in these data has the highest solute concentration
(lowest water potential). Suggest a reason for this.
(4 marks)
117
Chapter 5 Practice questions
4
The graph below shows the permeability
of a plasma membrane to different organic
solvents.
107
log membrane permeability (cm/hr)
0.001 -
0.0001 +
0.00001
0.0001 0.001 0.01
log oil to water solubility
0.1
a
b
Practice questions
1 Solution A has a more negative water
potential than solution B.
Which of the following statements is/are
correct?
Statement 1: Solution B has a higher water
potential than solution A
Statement 2: There would be a net
movement of water from solution A to
solution B
Statement 3: There would be a net
movement of water from solution A to
distilled water
A 1, 2 and 3 are correct
B Only 1 and 2 are correct
C Only 2 and 3 are correct
D Only 1 is correct
(1 mark)
2 Membrane proteins are essential in order for
cells to interact with their environment and
other cells. About a third of the genes in a
human genome code for membrane proteins.
a (i) Explain what is meant by the term
simple protein.
(2 marks)
(ii) List the different levels of protein
structure.
(3 marks)
b Outline the roles of proteins in a cell
surface membrane.
(5 marks)
3 A plasma membrane has a very complex
structure which is affected by changes in
the cells environment. Changes in pH or
temperature affect the permeability of plasma
membranes.
a Describe how you would use a
colorimeter to investigate how cell
membrane permeability changes with
temperature.
(6 marks)
b Describe what you would do to ensure
your results were:
(i) valid
(2 marks)
(ii) reliable
(2 marks)
c Suggest why alcohol is used in antiseptic
wipes.
(3 marks)
5
Describe the relationship between lipid
solubility and membrane permeability of
organic molecules.
(2 marks)
The size of the circles is proportional to
the size of the organic molecule.
It is known that with two organic
molecules of the same lipid solubility,
the one with greater molecular weight,
or size, will cross the membrane more
slowly.
State whether the data in the graph above
agrees with this fact. Suggest a reason for
your answer.
(3 marks)
A student stated the following answer
about membranes
The cell membrane is a thin semi-permeable
membrane that surrounds the cytoplasm
of a cell
(i) Suggest why the student should have
used the term 'selectively permeable'
rather than 'semi-permeable' to
describe a cell membrane. (2 marks)
(ii) Identify one other error in this
statement
(1 mark)
Explain how water molecules cross
selectively permeable membranes by
simple diffusion.
(2 marks)
b
118
5.1 The structure and function of membranes
Study tip
When discussing transport
proteins be specific - use the
term 'channel protein' (passive) or
'carrier protein' (active or passive).
Intrinsic proteins
Intrinsic proteins, or integral proteins, are transmembrane proteins
that are embedded through both layers of a membrane. They have
amino acids with hydrophobic R-groups on their external surfaces,
which interact with the hydrophobic core of the membrane, keeping
them in place.
Channel and carrier proteins are intrinsic proteins. They are both
involved in transport across the membrane.
Channel proteins provide a hydrophilic channel that allows the
passive movement (Topic 5.3, Diffusion) of polar molecules and
ions down a concentration gradient through membranes. They are
held in position by interactions between the hydrophobic core of
the membrane and the hydrophobic R-groups on the outside of
the proteins.
Carrier proteins have an important role in both passive transport
(down a concentration gradient) and active transport (against a
concentration gradient) into cells (Topic 5.4, Active transport). This
often involves the shape of the protein changing.
Glycoproteins
Glycoproteins are intrinsic proteins. They are embedded in the
cell-surface membrane with attached carbohydrate (sugar) chains of
varying lengths and shapes. Glycoproteins play a role in cell adhesion
(when cells join together to form tight junctions in certain tissues) and
as receptors for chemical signals.
When the chemical binds to the receptor, it elicits a response from the
cell. This may cause a direct response or set off a cascade of events
inside the cell. This process is known as cell communication or cell
signalling. Examples include:
•
receptors for neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine at nerve cell
synapses. The binding of the neurotransmitters triggers or prevents
an impulse in the next neurone
receptors for peptide hormones, including insulin and glucagon,
which affect the uptake and storage of glucose by cells.
Synoptic link
You will learn about cell
communication in the nervous
and endocrine (hormone)
systems in Chapter 13, Neuronal
communication and Chapter 14,
Hormonal communication.
Some drugs act by binding to cell receptors. For example, blockers
are used to reduce the response of the heart to stress.
Glycolipids
Glycolipids are similar to glycoproteins. They are lipids with attached
carbohydrate (sugar) chains. These molecules are called cell markers or
antigens and can be recognised by the cells of the immune system as self
(of the organism) or non-self (of cells belonging to another organism).
Synoptic link
You will learn about antigens
and cell recognition in an
immune response in Chapter 12,
Communicable diseases.
Extrinsic proteins
Extrinsic proteins or peripheral proteins are present in one side of
the bilayer. They normally have hydrophilic R-groups on their outer
surfaces and interact with the polar heads of the phospholipids or with
intrinsic proteins. They can be present in either layer and some move
between layers.
104
5.3 Diffusion
Specification reference: 2.1.5
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the passive movement
of molecules across
membranes
→ practical investigations into
the factors affecting diffusion
rates in model cells.
The exchange of substances between cells and their environment or
between membrane-bound compartments within cells and the cell cytosol
is defined as either active (requiring metabolic energy) or passive. All
movement requires energy. Passive movement, however, utilises energy
from the natural motion of particles, rather than energy from an another
source. This topic will focus on passive transport methods.
Diffusion
Diffusion is the net, or overall, movement of particles (atoms,
molecules or ions) from a region of higher concentration to a region
of lower concentration. It is a passive process and it will continue
until there is a concentration equilibrium between the two areas.
Equilibrium means a balance or no difference in concentrations.
Study tip
Diffusion only occurs between
different concentrations of the
same substance.
Diffusion happens because the particles in a gas or liquid have kinetic
energy (they are moving). This movement is random and an unequal
distribution of particles will eventually become an equal distribution.
Equilibrium doesn't mean the particles stop moving, just that the
movements are equal in both directions.
Particles move at high speeds and are constantly colliding, which slows
down their overall movement. This means that over short distances
diffusion is fast, but as diffusion distance increases the rate of diffusion
slows down because more collisions have taken place.
For this reason cells are generally microscopic – the movement of
particles within cells depends on diffusion and a large cell would lead
to slow rates of diffusion. Reactions would not get the substrates they
need quickly enough or ATP would be supplied too slowly to energy-
requiring processes.
Factors affecting rate of diffusion
• temperature - the higher the temperature the higher the rate of
diffusion. This is because the particles have more kinetic energy
and move at higher speeds.
concentration difference - the greater the difference in
concentration between two regions the faster the rate of diffusion.
because the overall movement from the higher concentration to
lower concentration will be larger.
A concentration difference is said to be a concentration gradient,
which goes from high to low concentration. Diffusion takes place
down a concentration gradient. It takes a lot more energy to move
substances up a concentration gradient.
So far diffusion in the absence of a barrier or membrane has been
considered. This is simple diffusion.
Figure 1 The random movement
of particles means the initial unequal
distribution eventually evens out
108
5.5 Osmosis
Specification reference: 2.1.5
Osmosis is a particular type of diffusion - specifically the diffusion
of water across a partially permeable membrane. As with all types of
diffusion it is a passive process and energy is not required.
Water potential
A solute is a substance dissolved in a solvent (for example water)
forming a solution.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the movement of water
across membranes by
osmosis
the effects that solutions
of different water potential
can have on plant and
animal cells
practical investigations into
the effects of solutions of
different water potential on
plant and animal cells.
The amount of solute in a certain volume of aqueous solution is the
concentration. Water potential is the pressure exerted by water
molecules as they collide with a membrane or container. It is measured
in units of pressure pascals (Pa) or kilopascals (kPa). The symbol for water
potential is the Greek letter psi Y.
Pure water is defined as having a water potential of OkPa (at standard
temperature and atmospheric pressure -25°C and 100 kPa). This is
the highest possible value for water potential, as the presence of a
solute in water lowers the water potential below zero. All solutions
have negative water potentials - the more concentrated the solution
the more negative the water potential.
Study tip
Remember that all water potential
values are negative. Pure water
has a water potential of zero.
When solutions of different concentrations, and therefore different
water potentials, are separated by a partially permeable membrane,
the water molecules can move between the solutions but the solutes
usually cannot. There will be a net movement of water from the
solution with the higher water potential (less concentrated) to the
solution with the lower water potential (more concentrated). This
will continue until the water potential is equal on both sides of the
membrane (equilibrium).
water
molecules
partially permeable
membrane
OOOOOOOOOO
0
Effects of osmosis on plant and animal cells
The diffusion of water into a solution leads to an increase
in volume of this solution. If the solution is in a closed
system, such as a cell, this results in an increase in pressure.
This pressure is called hydrostatic pressure and has the
same units as water potential, kPa. At the cellular level this
pressure is relatively large and potentially damaging.
Oo oo
ooº ooo
oOo
0 0
srisililistallille
O oºo 0 0.00
Oo ooo
molecules
net movement of water
solute
Animal cells
dilute solution
low concentration of solute
high water potential (V)
concentrated solution
high concentration of solute
low water potential (V)
If an animal cell is placed in a solution with a higher water
potential than that of the cytoplasm, water will move into the
cell by osmosis, increasing the hydrostatic pressure inside the
cell. All cells have thin cell-surface membranes (around 7 nm)
and no cell walls. The cell-surface membrane cannot stretch
much and cannot withstand the increased pressure. It will
break and the cell will burst, an event called cytolysis.
A Figure 1 Due to the greater number of water
molecules on the left-hand side of the partially
permeable membrane, diffusion occurs until the
number of water molecules is equal on both sides of
the membrane. This movement is called osmosis
114
PLASMA MEMBRANES
Study tip
Endocytosis is the bulk transport of material into cells. There
are two types of endocytosis, phagocytosis for solids and
pinocytosis for liquids - the process is the same for both.
The cell-surface membrane first invaginates (bends inwards) when
it comes into contact with the material to be transported. The
membrane enfolds the material until eventually the membrane
fuses, forming a vesicle. The vesicle pinches off and moves into the
cytoplasm to transfer the material for further processing within the
cell. For example, vesicles containing bacteria are moved towards
lysosomes, where the bacteria are digested by enzymes.
Exocytosis is the reverse of endocytosis. Vesicles, usually formed
by the Golgi apparatus, move towards and fuse with the cell
surface membrane. The contents of the vesicle are then released
outside of the cell.
It is important to understand the
difference between facilitated
diffusion and active transport.
Both use carrier proteins but
facilitated diffusion occurs down
a concentration gradient and
therefore does not require energy.
Synoptic link
You learnt about vesicles in
Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic cell structure.
endocytosis
Synoptic link
You will learn about phagocytosis
in Topic 12.5, Non-specific
defences against pathogens.
exocytosis
secretory
vesicle
vesicle
(endosome)
cell-surface
membrane
A Figure 2 Exocystosis is the reverse of endocytosis
Energy in the form of ATP is required for movement of vesicles along
the cytoskeleton, changing the shape of cells to engulf materials, and
the fusion of cell membranes as vesicles form or as they meet the cell-
surface membrane.
Summary questions
1 Explain why facilitated diffusion is not a form of active transport.
(2 marks)
2 Cells that carry out active transport usually have more mitochondria
than cells that do not. Explain why.
(2 marks)
3 Plant roots take up mineral ions from the soil. The concentration of
mineral ions in the soil water is very low. Suggest why active
transport is very important in root hair cells.
(4 marks)
113
PLASMA MEMBRANES
water surface (outside of cell)
This also happens to neurones in the brain, explaining the changes
seen in peoples' behaviour after consuming alcoholic drinks.
Investigating membrane permeability a
alcohol
Beetroot cells contain betalain, a red pigment that gives them their
distinctive colour, because of this they are useful for investigating the
effects of temperature and organic solvents on membrane permeability.
When beetroot cells membranes are disrupted the red pigment is released
and the surrounding solution is coloured. The amount of pigment released
into a solution is related to the disruption of the cell membranes.
water surface (inside of cell)
A Figure 2 The presence of alcohol
molecules between the phospholipids
disrupts the structure of the membrane
Synoptic link
You will learn about nerve impulse
transmission in Topic 13.4,
Nervous transmission.
To investigate the effect of temperature on the permeability of cell
membranes a student carried out the following procedure. Five small pieces
of beetroot of equal size were cut using a cork borer. The beetroot pieces
were thoroughly washed in running water, they were then placed in 100 ml
of distilled water in a water
bath. The temperature of the
water bath was increased
in 10°C intervals. Samples light source
detector
of the water containing
sample
the beetroot were taken
filter
five minutes after each
Figure 3 Light first passes through a
temperature was reached. filter and then the sample. The intensity of
The absorbance of each light hitting the detector is recorded
sample was measured using
a colorimeter with a blue
filter. The experiment was
done three times, each time
with fresh beetroot pieces
and a mean calculated for
each temperature. Their
0 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
results are shown in the
temperature (°C)
graph below.
A Figure 4
absorbance (blue light)
OOoooooo
OWNUONO
Summary questions
1 Explain why solvents like
water do not disrupt cell
membranes. (2 marks)
1 Suggest why:
a The beetroot pieces were washed in running water.
b Samples of the water containing the beetroot were taken five
minutes after each temperature was reached.
c The experiment was repeated three times.
d The absorbance of the samples was measure using a colorimeter
with a blue filter
2 The absorbance of the solution can be calculated from the amount
of light transmitted. Suggest how and explain why the absorbance
would change as the amount of pigment increases.
3 Look at the graph and suggest at what point the membrane what
disrupted.
Suggest how you would carry out an investigation to see the effects
of organic solvents on membrane permeability.
2 Describe how the absorbance
of light could be measured
quantitatively as the
concentration of released
pigment increased with
increasing temperature.
Describe the graph you
would plot to show these
results.
(4 marks)
3 Suggest how an excessive
consumption of alcohol could
lead to liver cell death and
ultimately be fatal. (6 marks)
107
PLASMA MEMBRANES
glass rod
Starch molecules are large and will not cross the tubing.
lodine is used to test for the presence of starch.
threads tightly
tied at the
two ends
dialysis tubing
starch and
glucose
solution
model cell
distilled water
Water is a small molecule which will pass through the tubing
while other solutes such as sucrose will not. Model cells can
be placed in solutions with different solute concentrations.
The rates of osmosis can be calculated using changes in
volume or mass of the model cells over time.
- beaker
Rates of diffusion at different temperatures can also be
calculated using a water bath to change the temperature
of the model cell. Other variables such as concentration
must be then be kept constant.
apparatus to show dialysis
A Figure 3 The apparatus above is used to demonstrate
that glucose molecules are small enough to diffuse out of the
'cell' but the starch molecules are too large. After a set time
the water is tested for the presence of starch and glucose
The changes in concentration of solute molecules, both
inside and outside the model cells, can be measured over
time. Rates of diffusion across the tubing can then be
calculated.
1 Explain why Benedict's test is both quantitative
and qualitative.
2 Explain what is meant by the term model cell.
3 a Describe the differences between dialysis
tubing and cell membranes with reference to
transport across membranes.
b Explain why some ions can pass through dialysis
tubing by diffusion but can only pass through cell
membranes by facilitated diffusion.
Glucose is a small molecule which can cross the tubing.
Benedict's solution is used to test for the presence of
glucose, and can also be used to estimate concentration.
Summary questions
1 Explain why the rate of diffusion increases as temperature
increases.
(2 marks)
2 State two changes to the structure of a cell-surface membrane
that would increase the rate at which polar molecules diffuse
into a cell.
(2 marks)
3 Movement requires energy and yet the movement of molecules
in diffusion is described as passive (not requiring energy).
Explain this statement and state the source of the energy
involved in diffusion.
(2 marks)
111
PLASMA MEMBRANES
Cholesterol
Cholesterol is a lipid with a hydrophilic end and a hydrophobic end,
like a phospholipid. It regulates the fluidity of membranes.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the structure of
cholesterol in Topic 3.5, Lipids.
Cholesterol molecules are positioned between phospholipids in a
membrane bilayer, with the hydrophilic end interacting with the
heads and the hydrophobic end interacting with the tails, pulling
them together. In this way cholesterol adds stability to membranes
without making them too rigid. The cholesterol molecules prevent
the membranes becoming too solid by stopping the phospholipid
molecules from grouping too closely and crystallising.
Sites of chemical reactions
Like enzymes, proteins in the membranes forming organelles, or
present within organelles, have to be in particular positions for
chemical reactions to take place. For example, the electron carriers
and the enzyme ATP synthase have to be in the correct positions
within the cristae (inner membrane of mitochondrion) for the
production of ATP in respiration. The enzymes of photosynthesis are
found on the membrane stacks within the chloroplasts.
Summary questions
1 Define the term 'compartmentalisation'.
(2 marks)
2 Describe the difference between intrinsic and extrinsic
proteins. State two examples of each.
Synoptic link
(4 marks)
3 Alcohol, caffeine, and nicotine are all lipid-soluble molecules -
they have an almost instant and widespread effect on the body.
Explain why.
(2 marks)
You learnt about the structure of
mitochondria and chloroplasts in
Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic cell structure,
and Topic 2.5, The ultrastructure
of plant cells. You will learn
more about the production of
ATP in respiration in Chapter 18,
Respiration.
4 Membranes, particularly those present within mitochondria,
are often highly folded. Suggest what advantages this folding
provides.
(6 marks)
105
5.2 Factors affecting membrane
structure
Specification reference: 2.1.5
Membranes control the passage of different substances into and out
of cells (and organelles). If membranes lose their structure, they lose
control of this and cell processes will be disrupted. A number of factors
affect membrane structure including temperature and the presence
of solvents.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
→ factors affecting membrane
structure and permeability
practical investigations into
factors affecting membrane
structure and permeability.
Temperature
Phospholipids in a cell membrane are constantly moving. When
temperature is increased the phospholipids will have more kinetic
energy and will move more. This makes a membrane more fluid and
it begins to lose its structure. If temperature continues to increase the
cell will eventually break down completely.
This loss of structure increases the permeability of the membrane,
making it easier for particles to cross it.
Carrier and channel proteins in the membrane will be denatured at
higher temperatures. These proteins are involved in transport across
the membrane so as they denature, membrane permeability will be
affected.
0000000
heat
Solvents
Water, a polar solvent, is essential in the formation of the phospholipid
bilayer. The non-polar tails of the phospholipids are orientated away
from the water, forming a bilayer with a hydrophobic core. The charged
phosphate heads interact with water, helping to keep the bilayer intact.
Many organic solvents are less polar than water for example alcohols,
or they are non-polar like benzene. Organic solvents will dissolve
membranes, disrupting cells. This is why alcohols are used in antiseptic
wipes. The alcohols dissolve the membranes of bacteria in a wound,
killing them and reducing the risk of infection.
Figure 1 The increase in kinetic
energy of the phospholipids disrupts
the structure of the membrane, creating
gaps and making it more permeable
Pure or very strong alcohol solutions are toxic as they destroy
cells in the body. Less concentrated solutions of alcohols, such as
alcoholic drinks, will not dissolve membranes but still cause damage.
The non-polar alcohol molecules can enter the cell membrane
and the presence of these molecules between the phospholipids
disrupts the membrane.
Study tip
Unlike proteins, membranes are not
denatured by high temperatures -
when they lose their structure they
should be described as disrupted
or destroyed.
When the membrane is disrupted it becomes more fluid and more
permeable. Some cells need intact cell membranes for specific
functions, for example, the transmission of nerve impulses by
neurones (nerve cells). When neuronal membranes are disrupted,
nerve impulses are no longer transmitted as normal.
106
5.4 Active transport
Specification reference: 2.1.5
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ active transport of molecules
across membranes
► endocytosis and exocytosis
as processes requiring ATP.
Diffusion, by its nature, will ultimately result in concentration gradients
being reduced until particles (atoms, molecules or ions) in the different
regions reach equilibrium. However, many biological processes
depend on the presence of a concentration gradient, for example, the
transmission of nerve impulses. To maintain this concentration gradient,
particles must be moved up it at a rate faster than the rate of diffusion.
This is an energy-requiring process called active transport.
Synoptic link
You learnt about ATP as an energy
supply in Topic 3.11, ATP. You will
learn about ATP production and
impulse transmission in Chapter 17,
Energy for biological processes
and Chapter 18, Respiration.
Active transport
Active transport is the movement of molecules or ions into or out
of a cell from a region of lower concentration to a region of higher
concentration. The process requires energy and carrier proteins.
Energy is needed as the particles are being moved up a concentration
gradient, in the opposite direction to diffusion. Metabolic energy is
supplied by ATP.
Carrier proteins span the membranes and act as 'pumps'. The general
process of active transport is described below - in this example
transport is from outside to inside a cell (Figure 1).
1
outside cell
membrane
carrier protein
spanning
membrane
The molecule or ion to be transported binds to receptors in the
channel of the carrier protein on the outside of the cell.
2 On the inside of the cell ATP binds to the
inside cell
carrier protein and is hydrolysed into ADP
and phosphate.
Binding of the phosphate molecule to
the carrier protein causes the protein to
change shape - opening up to the inside of
the cell.
The molecule or ion is released to the
inside of the cell.
5 The phosphate molecule is released from
the carrier protein and recombines with
ADP to form ATP.
The carrier protein returns to its original
shape.
molecule
ATP
molecules bind to
carrier protein and
ATP attaches to the
membrane protein
on the inside of
the cell
The process is selective - specific substances
are transported by specific carrier proteins.
ADP
binding of phosphate
ion to protein causes
the protein to change
shape so that access
for the molecules is
open to the inside of
the membrane but
closed to the outside
Bulk transport
Bulk transport is another form of active
transport. Large molecules such as enzymes,
hormones, and whole cells like bacteria are
too large to move through channel or carrier
proteins, so they are moved into and out of
cell by bulk transport.
A Figure 1 Active transport. The shape of the carrier protein changes
to move a particle from one side of the membrane to the other
112
PLASMA MEMBRANES
Rate of diffusion and surface area O
The rate of diffusion can be calculated in two ways - by distance travelled/time
and volume filled/time. Distance travelled/time is not affected by changes in
surface area, whilst volume/time varies depending on the surface area.
A student used different sized agar blocks to investigate how the rate of diffusion
was affected by surface area.
The agar used to make the blocks contained the indicator phenolphthalein with
turns pink in the presence of an alkali.
The agar blocks were immersed in a solution of sodium hydroxide for ten minutes. The blocks were removed and
distance the sodium hydroxide had diffused was measured with a ruler.
Results
Cube size
(cm)
Surface
area
(cm)
Volume
(cm)
Surface
area
/ volume
Diffusion
distance
(cm)
Rate of diffusion
using distance
(cm/min)
Rate of diffusion
using volume
(cm3/min)
Rate of diffusion
using volume per
64 cm agar
4x 4x4
0.3
2 x 2 x2
0.3
1x1x1
0.3
1 Copy and complete the table.
2 Explain what has happened in order for the diffusion distances to be measured.
3 Describe and explain the results.
Diffusion across membranes
Diffusion across membranes involves particles passing through the
phospholipid bilayer. It can only happen if the membrane is permeable
to the particles - non-polar molecules such as oxygen (0) diffuse
through freely down a concentration gradient.
The hydrophobic interior of the membrane repels substances with a
positive or negative charge (ions), so they cannot easily pass through.
Polar molecules, such as water (H,O) with partial positive and
negative charges can diffuse through membranes, but only at a very
slow rate. Small polar molecules pass through more easily than larger
ones. Membranes are therefore described as partially permeable.
The rate at which molecules or ions diffuse across membranes is
affected by:
Synoptic link
surface area - the larger the area of an exchange surface, the
higher the rate of diffusion
. thickness of membrane - the thinner the exchange surface, the
higher the rate of diffusion.
You will learn about surface
area to volume ratio in Topic 7.1,
Specialised exchange surfaces.
109
5
5.3 Diffusion
the cornea has no blood supply so its cells obtain
oxygen by simple diffusion from the air
air
.
high concentration
of oxygen in the air
high concentration
of oxygen in the tears
that coat the cornea
fluid (tears) {
cell on outer
surface of the
cornea
oxygen passes through
the plasma membrane by
simple diffusion
lower concentration
of oxygen in the cornea
cells due to aerobic respiration
Figure 2 Passive diffusion of oxygen into a cell of the cornea
Study tip
When referring to particles moving
passively do not say 'along',
'with' or 'across' but only 'down'
concentration gradients.
Facilitated diffusion
As you have learnt, the phospholipid bilayers of membranes are
barriers to polar molecules and ions. However, membranes contain
channel proteins through which polar molecules and ions can pass.
Diffusion across a membrane through protein channels is called
facilitated diffusion.
Study tip
Membranes with protein channels are selectively permeable as
most protein channels are specific to one molecule or ion.
Facilitated diffusion is still a
passive process, which does not
require energy from respiration.
Facilitated diffusion can also involve carrier proteins (Topic 5.4, Active
transport), which change shape when a specific molecule binds.
In facilitated diffusion the movement of the molecules is down a
concentration gradient and does not require external energy.
The rate of facilitated diffusion is dependent on the temperature,
concentration gradient, membrane surface area and thickness, but is
also affected by the number of channel proteins present. The more
protein channels, the higher the rates of diffusion overall.
Investigations into the factors affecting diffusion rates in model cells
As you have already seen, cell membranes are highly
complex structures involved in the active and passive
transport of ions and molecules. The hydrophobic
hydrocarbon core of the membrane is a barrier to ions
and large polar molecules, but it allows the passage
of non-polar molecules. Cells are too small and cell
membranes too thin to use in practical investigations
so dialysis tubing is used as a substitute membrane.
This model enables us to investigate the effects of
temperature and concentration on the rate of diffusion
across membranes.
Dialysis tubing is partially permeable, with pores a
similar size to those on a partially permeable membrane.
This means that small molecules like water can pass
through it, but larger molecules like starch cannot fit
through the pores. The tubing is therefore a barrier to
large molecules.
A model cell can be simulated by tying one end of a
section of tubing, filling with a solution and then tying
the other end. The 'cell' is then placed into another
solution. The solutions could contain different sizes, or
concentrations, of solute molecules.
110
PLASMA MEMBRANES
6
7
A classic experiment investigated the effect of
temperature on the rate of sugar transport in
a potted plant.
Aphid mouthparts were used to take samples
of sugar solution from the transport tissue in
the stem. The sugary solution dripped from
the mouthparts. The number of drips per
minute was counted.
The procedure was repeated at different
temperatures.
Table 1 shows the results obtained
The bilayer is the fundamental structure of
all cell membranes. The bilayer is composed
of two lipid layers which provide an effective
barrier to aqueous environments. This allows
for compartmentalisation and the formation
of cells and organelles.
Discuss the roles of the different lipid
components of plasma membranes. (6 marks)
Temperature (°C) Number of drips per
minute
5 L 3
106
20
14
30 L
40
26
19
50
Suggest brief explanations for these results.
(3 marks)
OCR F211 2012
119
