BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
of hydrogen atoms, resulting in a solid that is less dense than liquid
water. For this reason, ice floats.
Water therefore has cohesive properties. It moves as one mass because
the molecules are attracted to each other (cohesion). It is in this
way that plants are able to draw water up their roots and how you
are able to drink water through a straw. Water also has adhesive
properties - this is where water molecules are attracted to other
materials. For example, when you wash your hands your hands
become wet, the water doesn't run straight off.
Figure 4 This pond skater (Gerris
lacustris) inhabits the surface of water,
supported by surface tension
Water molecules are more strongly cohesive to each other than they
are to air, this results in water having a 'skin' of surface tension.
(Figure 4)
Study tip
Water for life
The characteristics and properties of water are critical in sustaining life.
In this way, water is unique. Some of the ways in which water is vital
for life are summarised below.
Do not confuse polarity with
"charged' or 'ionic'. In polar bonds
electrons are shared, albeit
unequally, but if atoms actually lose
an electron to another atom they
both become charged and are called
ions. In ionic bonding, the atom
that gains the electron becomes a
negative ion and the atom that loses
the electron becomes a positive ion.
Because it is a polar molecule, water acts as a solvent in which many of
the solutes in an organism can be dissolved. The cytosol of prokaryotes
(bacterial) and eukaryotes is mainly water. Many solutes are also polar
molecules, amino acids, proteins (Topic 3.6, Structure of proteins) and
nucleic acids (Topic 3.8, Nucleic acids). Water acts as a medium for
chemical reactions and also helps transport dissolved compounds into
and out of cells.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about how
temperature affects enzyme
activity in Topic 4.2, Factors
affecting enzyme activity.
Water makes a very efficient transport medium within living things.
Cohesion between water molecules means that when water is
transported though the body, molecules will stick together. Adhesion
occurs between water molecules and other polar molecules and
surfaces. The effects of adhesion and cohesion result in water
exhibiting capillary action. This is the process by which water can
rise up a narrow tube against the force of gravity.
Summary questions
1 Explain how hydrogen
bonds form. (3 marks)
Water acts as a coolant, helping to buffer temperature changes
during chemical reactions in prokaryotic and eukaroytic cells
because of the large amounts of energy required to overcome
hydrogen bonding. Maintaining constant temperatures in cellular
environments is important as enzymes are often only active in a
narrow temperature range.
2 Explain why water is
a polar molecule. (2 marks)
3 Suggest, with reasons, which
properties of water make it
such an important
component of blood. (5 marks)
Many organisms, such as fish, live in water and cannot survive out
of it. Water is stable - it does not change temperature or become a
gas easily, therefore providing a constant environment. Because ice
floats, it forms on the surface of ponds and lakes, rather than from
the bottom up. This forms an insulating layer above the water below.
Aquatic organisms would not be able to survive freezing temperatures
if their entire habitat froze solid. Some organisms also inhabit the
surface of water. Surface tension is strong enough to support small
insects such as pond skaters.
4 Water forms the basis of the
stroma in chloroplasts and the
matrix in mitochondria.
Describe which properties of
water make it such an important
component of these particular
organelles. (5 marks)
3.4 Testing for carbohydrates
Specification reference: 2.1.2
Chemical tests
Benedict's test for reducing sugars
In chemistry reduction is a reaction involving the gain of electrons.
All monosaccharides and some disaccharides (for example maltose
and lactose) are reducing sugars. This means that they can donate
electrons, or reduce another molecule or chemical.
In the chemical test for a reducing sugar, this chemical is Benedict's
reagent, an alkaline solution of copper(II)sulfate.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how to carry out and interpret
the results of:
Benedict's test
reagent test strips
. iodine test
quantitative methods to
determine the concentration
of a chemical substance
in a solution.
The test is carried out as follows:
1
Place the sample to be tested in a boiling tube. If it is not in liquid
form, grind it up or blend it in water.
Add an equal volume of Benedict's reagent.
Heat the mixture gently in a boiling water bath for five minutes.
2
3
Reducing sugars will react with the copper ions in Benedict's reagent.
This results in the addition of electrons to the blue Cu2+ ions, reducing
them to brick red Cutions. When a reducing sugar is mixed with
Benedict's reagent and warmed, a brick-red precipitate is formed
indicating a positive result.
Study tip
To remember what the colour
changes in the Benedict's test
indicate, just remember traffic lights:
The more reducing sugar present, the more precipitate formed and the
less blue Cu2+ ions are left in solution, so the actual colour seen will be
a mixture of brick-red (precipitate) and blue (unchanged copper ions)
and will depend on the concentration of the reducing sugar present
(Figure 1). This makes the test qualitative.
green (low concentration
of reducing sugar)
yellow/amber/orange
(medium concentration
of reducing sugar)
red (high concentration
of reducing sugar).
Using Benedict's test for non-reducing sugars
Non-reducing sugars do not react with Benedict's solution and the
solution will remain blue after warming, indicating a negative result.
Sucrose is the most common
non-reducing sugar.
If sucrose is first boiled with
dilute hydrochloric acid it will
then give a positive result when
warmed with Benedict's solution.
This is because the sucrose has
none very low low medium high
been hydrolysed by the acid to
glucose and fructose, both
Figure 1 Colour changes in a
Benedict's test according to the
reducing sugars.
concentration of reducing sugar present
lodine test for starch
The iodine test is used to detect the presence of starch. To carry out
the test, a few drops of iodine dissolved in potassium iodide solution
are mixed with a sample. If the solution changes colour from yellow/
brown to purple/black starch is present in the sample.
Figure 2 A positive test result for
starch using iodine
3.4 Testing for carbohydrates
If the iodine solution remains yellow/brown it is a negative result and
starch is not present.
Reagent strips
Manufactured reagent test strips can be used to test for the presence of
reducing sugars, most commonly glucose. The advantage is that, with
the use of a colour-coded chart, the concentration of the sugar can be
determined
Quantitative methods to determine concentration:
Colorimetry
4 The resulting solutions were filtered to remove
the precipitate.
In a Benedict's test, the colour produced is dependent on
5 The % transmission of each of the solutions of glucose
the concentration of reducing sugar present in the sample.
was measured using the colorimeter.
A colorimeter is a piece of equipment used to quantitatively Using this information a calibration curve was plotted.
measure the absorbance, or transmission, of light by a
Steps 3-6 were repeated using the solution with the
coloured solution. The more concentrated a solution is the
unknown concentration of glucose.
more light it will absorb and the less light it will transmit.
Table 1 Shows the results of the experiment
This can be used to calculate the concentration of reducing
sugar present.
Absorbance Concentration of
glucose/mM
1.0
2.0
3.0
40
5.0
68
56
47
4.0
27
17
6.0
2.0
Unknown solution
DIGITAL COLORIMETER
44
A Figure 3 A colorimeter measures the colour of a liquid.
It passes filtered light through the sample and the results
can be transmitted to a graph plotter or computer
A student was asked to determine the concentration of a
solution of glucose.
1 Describe how you would calculate % absorbance
from a % transmission reading.
2 Explain why it is important to use the correct
filter (step 1).
3 Describe how you calibrate a colorimeter (step 2).
4 Describe what you have after the solutions have
been filtered (step 4).
5 Plot a graph of the results from Table 1 and draw a
calibration curve.
6 Estimate the concentration of glucose in the
unknown solution.
The procedure was carried out as follows:
1 A filter was placed in the colorimeter.
2 The colorimeter was calibrated using distilled water.
3 Benedict's test was performed on a range of known
concentrations of glucose.
3.3 Carbohydrates
Specification reference: 2.1.2
Carbohydrates are molecules that only contain the elements carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen. Carbohydrate literally means 'hydrated
carbon' (carbon and water). The elements in carbohydrates usually
appear in the ratio Cx(H20)y. This is known as the general formula of
carbohydrates.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the ring structure and
properties of glucose
► the structure of ribose
► the synthesis and breakdown
of a disaccharide and
polysaccharide by the
formation and breakage of
glycosidic bonds
the structures and properties
of glucose, starch, glycogen
and cellulose molecules.
Carbohydrates are also known as saccharides or sugars. A single sugar
unit is known as a monosaccharide, examples include glucose,
fructose, and ribose. When two monosaccharides link together they
form a disaccharide, for example lactose and sucrose. When two or
more (usually many more) monosaccharides are linked they form a
polymer called a polysaccharide. Glycogen, cellulose, and starch are
examples of polysaccharides.
Glucose
The basic building blocks, or monomers, of some biologically
important large carbohydrates are glucose molecules, which have the
chemical formula C H, 0Glucose is a monosaccharide composed
of six carbons and therefore is a hexose monosaccharide (hexose
sugar) (Figure 1).
In molecular structure diagrams, the carbons are numbered clockwise,
beginning with the carbon to the right (clockwise) of the oxygen atom
within the ring.
There are two structural variations of the glucose molecule, alpha (a)
and beta (1) glucose, in which the OH (hydroxyl) group on carbon 1 is
in opposite positions, as shown in Figure 1.
u-glucose
B-glucose
CH,OH
CH,OH
H
TOH
KOH H1
VH V
4K OH H1
HO 13 2 OH HO 3 2 H
H OH
H OH
A Figure 1 The sugars alpha and beta glucose, which are examples of monosaccharides
(single sugar units). Note the different position of the OH group on carbon 1
Glucose molecules are polar and soluble in water. This is due to the
hydrogen bonds that form between the hydroxyl groups and water
molecules. This solubility in water is important, because it means
glucose is dissolved in the cytosol of the cell.
Condensation reactions
When two alpha glucose molecules are side by side, two hydroxyl
groups interact (react). When this happens bonds are broken and new
bonds reformed in different places producing new molecules.
46
3.10 Protein synthesis
Study tip
arginine
serine
leucine
www
asparagine
ACUGAC
proline
lysine
Compare Figure 4 from the
previous topic with Figure 4 here.
It is important to check whether
you have been given DNA codons
or RNA codons in a question.
Remember, RNA contains uracil (U)
in place of thymine (T).
ACUGAT
glutamine
threonine
histidine
isoleucine
arginine
start codon -
methionine
U 7 ACT
1st base of codon –
3rd
A
leucine
glycine
peptide bond forms
Xohenylalanine
met
thr
asp
aspartic
acid
serine
glutamic
acid
UCAGLUC
stop
alanine
cysteine
valine
tyrosine
stop
tryoptophan
ribosome
ribosome moves
along mRNA
Figure 4 The codon-amino acid wheel, as seen in Topic 3.9, DNA replication and the
genetic code. This time RNA codons are shown
met
thr
asp
1
The mRNA binds to the small subunit of the ribosome at its start
codon (AUG).
A tRNA with the complementary anticodon (UAC) binds to the
mRNA start codon. This tRNA carries the amino acid methionine.
Another tRNA with the anticodon UGC and carrying the
corresponding amino acid, threonine, then binds to the next codon
on the mRNA (ACG). A maximum of two tRNAs can be bound at
the same time.
The first amino acid, methionine, is transferred to the amino acid
(threonine) on the second tRNA by the formation of a peptide
bond. This is catalysed by the enzyme peptidyl transferase, which is
an rRNA component of the ribosome.
The ribosome then moves along the mRNA, releasing the first
tRNA. The second tRNA becomes the first.
4
ribosome
ribosome
moves
along
mRNA
when the
ribosome
reaches a
stop
tripeptide
codon the
polypeptide
is released
met
thr
asp
5
Stages 3–5 are repeated, with another amino acid added to the chain
each time. The process keeps repeating until the ribosome reaches the
end of the mRNA at a stop codon and the polypeptide is released.
mRNA
ribosome
As the amino acids are joined together forming the primary structure
of the protein, they fold into secondary and tertiary structures. This
folding and the bonds that are formed are determined by the sequence
A Figure 5 A summary of translation
78
3.3 Carbohydrates
Study tip
Make sure you know the positions
of the OH groups on carbon 1
and carbon 4 for both alpha and
beta glucose.
Cellulose molecules make hydrogen bonds with each other forming
microfibrils. These microfibrils join together forming macrofibrils,
which combine to produce fibres (Figure 8). These fibres are strong
and insoluble and are used to make cell walls. Cellulose is an
important part of our diet, it is very hard to break down into its
monomers and forms the 'fibre' or 'roughage' necessary for a healthy
digestive system.
Remember that most of the bonds
you will learn about are formed
from condensation reactions.
cellulose fibres
The reverse of a condensation
reaction is hydrolysis.
macrofibril
microfibril
www.
www
w
w
ww.
chains of
cellulose
molecules
DUUU
Coco
OUUU
www
A Figure 8 Formation of cellulose fibres
Summary questions
1 Describe the difference between alpha and beta glucose.
(2 marks)
2 Describe the formation of a glycosidic bond.
(4 marks)
3 Explain how the structure of cellulose is related to its function. (4 marks)
4 Explain why beta glucose, when polymerised, leads to the
production of cellulose instead of starch.
(6 marks)
50
3.2 Water
Specification reference: 2.1.2
.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how hydrogen bonding occurs
between water molecules
how the properties of water
relate to its roles in living
organisms.
The bonds of life
Atoms join together to form molecules by making bonds with each
other. As you learnt in the previous topic, in ionic bonds, atoms give
or receive electrons. They form negative or positive ions that are held
together by the attraction of the opposite charges. Covalent bonds
occur when atoms share electrons. However, the negative electrons are
not always shared equally by the atoms of different elements. In many
covalent bonds, the electrons will spend more time closer to one of the
atoms than to the other. The atom with the greater share of negative
electrons will be slightly negative (8) compared with the other atom
in the bond, which will therefore be slightly positive (8+) (Figure 1).
oxygen
hydrogen
Molecules in which this happens are said to be polar - they have
regions of negativity and regions of positivity.
O:
electrons
Oxygen and hydrogen are examples of elements that do not share
electrons equally in a covalent bond. Oxygen always has a much
greater share of the electrons in an 0-H bond. Many organic
molecules contain oxygen and hydrogen bonded together in what
are called hydroxyl (OH) groups and so they are slightly polar. Water
(H,O) is an example of such a molecule, in fact, water contains two of
these hydroxyl groups (Figure 2).
Figure 1 Covalent bond between
oxygen and hydrogen. The unequal
sharing of the electrons leads to oxygen
being more negative compared with
hydrogen
Polar molecules, including water, interact with each other as the
positive and negative regions of the molecule attract each other and
form bonds, called hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bonds are relatively
weak interactions, which break and reform between the constantly
moving water molecules.
oxygen
Polar covalent bonds
8+
0
0
8+
Although hydrogen bonds are only weak interactions, they occur in
high numbers. Hydrogen bonding gives water its unique characteristics,
which are essential for life on this planet. These characteristics are
explored further below.
hydrogen
hydrogen
Figure 2 The polar covalent bonds
make water a polar molecule
Characteristics of water
Water has an unusually high boiling point. Water is a small molecule,
much lighter than the gases carbon dioxide or oxygen, yet unlike
oxygen and carbon dioxide, water is a liquid at room temperature.
This is due to the hydrogen bonding between water molecules. It takes
a lot of energy to increase the temperature of water and cause water
to become gaseous (evaporate).
hydrogen
bonds
.
When water freezes it turns to ice. Most substances are more dense in
their solid state than in their liquid state, but when water turns to ice
it becomes less dense. This is because of the hydrogen bonds formed.
As water is cooled below 4°C the hydrogen bonds fix the positions of
the polar molecules slightly further apart than the average distance
in the liquid state. This produces a giant, rigid but open structure,
with every oxygen atom at the centre of a tetrahedral arrangement
A Figure 3 Five water molecules
interacting via hydrogen bonds
44
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
Summary questions
1 Explain how atoms join together to form molecules.
(2 marks)
2 Explain the difference between a cation and an anion.
(4 marks)
3 Explain how the bonds between the atoms in both water
and carbon dioxide molecules fulfil the 'bonding rules' (4 marks)
4 The image below, obtained in 1953, helped confirm the recently
proposed structure of DNA. The equipment that was used to obtain
the image is also shown, X-ray diffraction photograph of DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid). This image was obtained in 1953 and results
from a beam of X-rays being scattered onto a photographic plate by the
DNA. Various features about the structure of the DNA can be determined
from the pattern of spots and bands. The cross of bands indicates the
helical nature of DNA.
X-ray tube
lead screen
spots from
diffracted
X-rays
crystalline solid
like DNA
spot from
X-ray beam
photographic
plate
a Suggest why the X-ray diffraction technique used to produce
this image was not considered a form of microscopy but the
use of electrons to produce images is called electron
microscopy.
(3 marks)
b Explain why cells are visible with light microscopes but
electron microscopes are needed to see ribosomes. (3 marks)
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
animals are mobile, unlike plants. The coiling or branching of these
polysaccharides makes them very compact, which is ideal for storage.
The branching also means there are many free ends where glucose
molecules can be added or removed. This speeds up the processes of
storing or releasing glucose molecules required by the cell.
So, the key properties of amylopectin and glycogen are that they are
insoluble, branched, and compact. These properties mean they are
ideally suited to the storage roles that they carry out.
Hydrolysis reactions
Glucose is stored as starch by plants or glycogen by animals and fungi,
until it is needed for respiration - the process in which biochemical
energy in these stored nutrients is converted into a useable energy
source for the cell.
To release glucose for respiration, starch or glycogen undergo
hydrolysis reactions, requiring the addition of water molecules.
The reactions are catalysed by enzymes. These are the reverse of the
condensation reactions that form the glycosidic bonds.
Synoptic link
You will learn about cellular
respiration in more detail in
Chapter 18, Respiration.
Cellulose
Beta glucose molecules are unable to join together in the same
way that alpha glucose molecules can. As you can see in Figure 5,
the hydroxyl groups on carbon 1 and carbon 4 of the two glucose
molecules are too far from each other to react.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about ATP in
Topic 3.11, ATP.
CH,OH
1/
H
/H
The only way that beta glucoses molecules can join together and form
a polymer is if alternate beta glucose molecules are turned upside
down as in Figure 6.
B-glucose
B-glucose
B-glucose
B-glucose
H OH
CH,OH
CH,OH
H0 OH SO OH
Ho OH HOH
V
V
OH HV
4K OH HIKOH H1
4K OH H1
HO 13 21
H
HO
HO 32H
13 21 H
10 OH
H 5
H OH
H OH
H OH
CH,OH
A Figure 5 Note how far apart the OH groups are
A Figure 6 The OH groups of the two B-glucoses are now
on these two B-glucose molecules
close enough to react and a 1,4 glycosidic bond is formed
When a polysaccharide is formed from glucose in this way it is unable
to coil or form branches. A straight chain molecule is formed called
cellulose (Figure 7).
CH,OH
H
OH
CH OH
H
OH
HOOGH HT
VOH HV
KOH H
KH
KOH
OH HV
H
LO-
HH
H
OH
CH OH
H
OH
CH OH
Figure 7 The cellulose molecule is straight and unbranched
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
This mRNA molecule then travels to a ribosome in the cell cytoplasm
for the next step in protein synthesis.
Study tip
Translation
In eukaryotic cells, ribosomes are made up of two subunits, one
large and one small. These subunits are composed of almost equal
amounts of protein and a form of RNA known as ribosomal (r)RNA.
rRNA is important in maintaining the structural stability of the
protein synthesis sequence and plays a biochemical role in catalysing
the reaction.
Make sure you can compare the
similarities and differences in
biological processes, so be sure
you are very clear about the steps
in DNA replication, translation and
transcription.
Remember, transcription and
translation involve RNA, which
contains the base uracil instead
of thymine.
After leaving the nucleus, the mRNA binds to a specific site on the
small subunit of a ribosome. The ribosome holds mRNA in position
while it is decoded, or translated, into a sequence of amino acids. This
process is called translation.
- point of attachment
of amino acid
paired bases
ş
VI
unpaired
bases
anticodon
Figure 2 Large and small subunits of the ribosome with
loop
proteins shown in purple, ribosomal RNA in pink and yellow and
the site that catalyses the formation of peptide bonds in green
The 3 bases forming the anticodon
Figure 3 The structure of tRNA
Transfer (t)RNA is another form of RNA, which is necessary for the
translation of the mRNA. It is composed of a strand of RNA folded in
such a way that three bases, called the anticodon, are at one end of the
molecule (Figure 3). This anticodon will bind to a complementary codon
on mRNA following the normal base pairing rules. The tRNA molecules
carry an amino acid corresponding to that codon (Figure 4).
When the tRNA anticodons bind to complementary codons along the
mRNA, the amino acids are brought together in the correct sequence
to form the primary structure of the protein coded for by the mRNA.
This cannot happen all at once. Instead amino acids are added one
at a time and the polypeptide chain (protein) grows as this happens.
Ribosomes act as the binding site for mRNA and tRNA and catalyse
the assembly of the protein. The sequence of events in translation is
summarised on the next page and in Figure 5.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
Biosensors
Biosensors use biological components to determine the
presence and concentration of molecules such as glucose.
Display - this then produces a visible, qualitative or
quantitative signal such as a particular colour on a
test strip or reading on a test machine.
The basic components of a biosensor are shown
in Figure 4.
The analyte is the compound under investigation.
• Molecular recognition - a protein (enzyme or
antibody) or single strand of DNA (ssDNA) is
immobilised to a surface, for example a glucose test
strip. This will interact with, or bind to, the specific
molecule under investigation.
Transduction - this interaction will cause a change
in a transducer. A transducer detects changes, for
example in pH, and produces a response such as
the release of an immobilised dye on a test strip
or an electric current in a glucose-testing machine.
1 Canaries used to be used in the coal mining
industry to detect the presence of harmful gases
such as carbon monoxide. Miners would take the
canaries, in cages, into the mines where they were
working, and if the birds started to show signs of
distress this signalled the presence of harmful
gas. Discuss whether a canary in a cage is a
biosensor and suggest a disadvantage of the use
of this method to detect toxic gases.
enzyme reaction
Ab
sample (analyte)
immunological
reaction
transducer
signal
data
processing
SSDNA
DNA hybrid
A Figure 4 The main components in a biosensor
Summary questions
1 Describe the feature of enzymes essential to their role as
components in a biosensor.
(3 marks)
2 Why does Benedict's reagent turn red when warmed
with a reducing sugar?
(2 marks)
3 Explain why an iodine test is used in experiments to show
that plants require light for photosynthesis.
(3 marks)
Suggest how reagent strips might be useful in the
management of the medical condition diabetes, where a
person's blood sugar level can become too high.
(4 marks)
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
3 Which of the following sequences is correct in terms
of increasing bond strength?
a ionic bonds, disulfide bonds, hydrogen bonds
b hydrogen bonds, ionic bonds, disulfide bonds
c disulfide bonds, ionic bonds, hydrogen bonds
1 Suggest what property the arrangement of collagen
fibres into large bundles gives to tendons.
2 As we age the collagen in our skin starts to break
down. This leads to the loss of skin structure and
the formation of wrinkles. Many beauty products
are available that contain collagen in the form of
creams and capsules. Using your knowledge of the
structure of collagen, suggest why these products
are unlikely to have any beneficial effect in reducing
or preventing wrinkles.
Summary questions
Study tip
1 Explain the difference between a simple protein and a
conjugated protein.
(3 marks)
Make sure you are able to compare
globular and fibrous proteins using
named examples.
2 Describe the differences in properties and functions of insulin,
a hormone, and keratin present in hair and nails.
(4 marks)
3 Describe why globular proteins are soluble in water but
fibrous proteins are not.
(3 marks)
4 Myoglobin is an oxygen carrying molecule found primarily in muscle
tissue. It is formed from a single polypeptide chain which is folded to form
eight alpha helices. This chain is further folded around a central prosthetic
group which binds reversibly with oxygen. The hydrophobic R groups of the
amino acids are positioned towards the centre of the molecule.
Discuss the similarities and differences in the structures of
haemoglobin and myoglobin.
(6 marks)
3.8 Nucleic acids
Specification reference: 2.1.2, 2.1.3
Nucleic acids are large molecules that were discovered in cell nuclei –
hence their name. There are two types of nucleic acid - DNA and
RNA, and both have roles in the storage and transfer of genetic
information and the synthesis of polypeptides (proteins). They are
the basis for heredity.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the structure of a nucleotide
► the synthesis and breakdown
of polynucleotides
► the structure of DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid)
practical investigations into
the purification of DNA by
precipitation.
Nucleotides and nucleic acids
Nucleic acids contain the elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen and phosphorus. They are large polymers formed from
many nucleotides (the monomers) linked together in a chain.
An individual nucleotide is made up of three components, as shown
in Figure 1:
(a)-
phosphate
sugar
base
a pentose monosaccharide (sugar), containing five carbon atoms
a phosphate group, -PO,2-, an inorganic molecule that is acidic
and negatively charged
sugar-phosphate backbone
a nitrogenous base - a
complex organic molecule
phosphate
containing one or two carbon
rings in its structure as well
base
sugar
as nitrogen.
0--P-0-
O=
OH
OH
base
phosphodiester
bond
base
3
OH
Figure 1 (a) A nucleotide and its three
component parts: a sugar, a phosphate
and a base (the numbers in blue denote
the standard numbering of the five
carbons in the sugar). (b) A simple
representation of a nucleotide
Nucleotides are linked together
by condensation reactions
to form a polymer called a
polynucleotide. The phosphate
group at the fifth carbon of
the pentose sugar (5') of one
nucleotide forms a covalent bond
with the hydroxyl (OH) group
at the third carbon (3') of the
pentose sugar of an adjacent
nucleotide. These bonds are
called phosphodiester bonds.
This forms a long, strong sugar-
phosphate 'backbone' with a base
attached to each sugar (Figure 2).
The phosphodiester bonds are
broken by hydrolysis, the
reverse of condensation, releasing
the individual nucleotides.
nucleotide added
to the chain
base
Figure 2 Nucleotides (monomers)
are linked together to form the polymer,
nucleic acid (polynucleotide). Note the
sugar-phosphate backbone with all the
bases projecting from the opposite side
Study tip
You do not need to remember
the detailed chemical structure
of nucleotides or nucleic acids,
but you should learn the basic
structures of phosphate, sugars
and bases.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
As the name suggests, the sugar in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
is deoxyribose - a sugar with one fewer oxygen atoms than ribose, as
shown in Figure 3.
68
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
3.1 Biological elements
Specification reference: 2.1.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
the chemical elements that
make up biological molecules :
► the key inorganic ions that
are involved in biological
processes
→ monomers and polymers as
biological molecules.
The building blocks of life
In section 2 you looked at cells and cellular components, however,
these too are composed from smaller components called molecules,
Molecules are built from even smaller components called atoms. In
fact, atoms are built from yet smaller components including protons,
neutrons, and electrons, which you will have learned about in your
GCSE science or chemistry studies.
Knowledge of biochemistry is essential, as it underpins a proper
understanding of the metabolic processes, structures, and limitations
of biology, for example the complex series of reactions and molecules
involved in cellular respiration. You do not need to be a chemist to
understand basic biochemistry, as you will see in coming topics, but
you do need to understand some essential chemical concepts and
rules, which will be explored in this chapter.
HYDROGEN
atomic nucleus
proton
(positively charged)
Elements
electron
(negatively charged)
in a 3-dimensional
orbit around the
nucleus
Different types of atoms are called elements. Elements are distinguished
by the number of protons in their atomic nuclei. There are over a hundred
known elements in the universe but only a small percentage of these are
present in the living world.
electron shell
atomic number
number of protons
number of neutrons
number of electrons
mass number
If you have ever built a model using interlocking bricks you will know
how useful the bricks that make the most connections are, at the start
of a new build.
CARBON
atomic number
number of protons 6
number of neutrons 6
number of electrons 6
mass number 12
In the same way that complex models can be built from a small range
of simple bricks, all living things are made primarily from four key
elements - carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (0) and nitrogen (N).
In addition, phosphorus (P) and sulfur (S) also have important roles
in the biochemistry of cells. These six elements are by far the most
abundant elements present in biological molecules.
Other elements, including sodium (Na), potassium (K), calcium (Ca),
and iron (Fe), also have important roles in biochemistry. You will learn
about some of the roles of these elements later in this chapter.
OXYGEN
atomic number
number of protons 8
number of neutrons 81
number of electrons 8
mass number 16
Bonding
Atoms connect with each other by forming bonds. Atoms can
bond to other atoms of the same element, or atoms of different
elements, provided this follows the 'bonding rules' (described on the
next page). When two or more atoms bond together the complex is
called a molecule.
Figure 1 Atomic structure of hydrogen,
carbon and oxygen which are common
biological elements
A covalent bond occurs when two atoms share a pair of electrons. The
electrons used to form bonds are unpaired and present in the outer
orbitals of the atoms.
40
3.5 Lipids
Specification reference: 2.1.2
Lipids, commonly known as fats and oils, are molecules containing
the elements carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Generally, fats are lipids
that are solid at room temperature and oils are lipids that are liquid at
room temperature.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the structure of a triglyceride
and a phospholipid
► the synthesis and breakdown
of triglycerides
properties of triglyceride,
phospholipid, and cholesterol
molecules
how to carry out and interpret
the results of an emulsion
test for lipids.
Lipids are non-polar molecules as the electrons in the outer orbitals
that form the bonds are more evenly distributed than in polar
molecules. This means there are no positive or negative areas within
the molecules and for this reason lipids are not soluble in water. Oil
and water do not mix.
Lipids are large complex molecules known as macromolecules, which
are not built from repeating units, or monomers, like polysaccharides.
In this topic we will be looking at the lipids, triglycerides, phospholipids,
and sterols.
Triglycerides
A triglyceride is made by combining one glycerol molecule with
three fatty acids. Glycerol is a member of a group of molecules called
alcohols. Fatty acids belong to a group of molecules called carboxylic
acids – they consist of a carboxyl group (-COOH) with a hydrocarbon
chain attached.
As you can see in Figure 1, both of these molecules contain
hydroxyl (OH) groups. The hydroxyl groups interact, leading to the
formation of three water molecules and bonds between the fatty
acids and the glycerol molecule. These are called ester bonds and
this reaction is called esterification. Esterification is another example
of a condensation reaction, which you learnt about in Topic 3.3,
Carbohydrates.
glycerol
H
H.
H-C-0-H
fatty acids
triglyceride (fat)
HO C-(CH2), CH3
H-C-0-C-(CH2), CH3
condensation
HO-C-(CH2), CH3 (water removed) H-C0C-(CH2), CH3
0
H-C-0-H
H-0-0-H
HO-C-(CH2), CH3
H-C- C-(CH2), CH3
H
3H20
ester bond
Figure 1 Synthesis of a triglyceride from glycerol and three fatty acids by the
formation of three ester bonds, producing three water molecules
When triglycerides are broken down, three water molecules need to
be supplied to reverse the reaction that formed the triglyceride.
This is another example of a hydrolysis reaction (Topic 3.3,
Carbohydrates).
54
3
3.1 Biological elements
Ions in solution are called electrolytes. The following tables list some of
the important roles of ions in living organisms.
Table 2 Roles of cations
Cations
Necessary for
calcium ions (Ca2+)
nerve impulse transmission
muscle contraction
sodium ions (Na+)
potassium ions (K+)
nerve impulse transmission
kidney function
nerve impulse transmission
stomatal opening
catalysis of reactions
pH determination
production of nitrate ions by bacteria
hydrogen ions (H+)
ammonium ions (NH +)
Table 3 Roles of anions
Anions
Necessary for
nitrogen supply to plants for amino
acid and protein formation
nitrate ions (NO3-)
hydrogen carbonate ions (HCO3-)
maintenance of blood pH
chloride ions (CI+)
balance positive charge of sodium
and potassium ions in cells
phosphate ions (PO3-)
cell membrane formation
nucleic acid and ATP formation
bone formation
hydroxide ions (OH)
catalysis of reactions
pH determination
Biological molecules
Below is a summary of the elements present in some of the key biological
molecules. You will learn more about each of these classes of molecule in
the coming topics of this chapter.
Carbohydrates - carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, usually in the
ratio C (H20),
Lipids - carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
Proteins - carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur.
Nucleic acids - carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus.
Polymers
Biological molecules are often polymers. Polymers are long-chain
molecules made up by the linking of multiple individual molecules
(called monomers) in a repeating pattern. In carbohydrates the
monomers are sugars (saccharides) and in proteins the monomers
are amino acids.
42
3.5 Lipids
Synoptic link
As a result of their dual hydrophobic/hydrophilic structure, phospholipids
behave in an interesting way when they interact with water.
You will learn about the role of
surfactants in the lungs in
Topic 6.2, The mammalian gaseous
exchange system.
They will form a layer on the surface of the water with the phosphate
heads in the water and the fatty acid tails sticking out of the water
(Figure 4). Because of this they are called surface active agents or
surfactants for short.
hydrophilic
head of
phospholipid
molecule
hydrophobic
tail of
phospholipid
molecule
They can also form structures based on a two-layered sheet formation
(a bilayer) with all of their hydrophobic tails pointing toward the
centre of the sheet, protected from the water by the hydrophilic heads
(Figure 5).
It is as a result of this bilayer arrangement that phospholipids play
a key role in forming cell membranes. They are able to separate an
aqueous environment in which cells usually exist from the aqueous
cytosol within cells. It is thought that this is how the first cells were
formed and, later on, membrane-bound organelles within cells.
water
Figure 4 A phospholipid monolayer
in water
Sterols
Sterols, also known as steroid alcohols, are another type of lipid
found in cells. They are not fats or oils and have little in common with
them structurally. They are complex alcohol molecules, based on a
four carbon ring structure with a hydroxyl (OH) group at one end.
Like phospholipids, however, they have dual hydrophilic/hydrophobic
characteristics. The hydroxyl group is polar and therefore hydrophilic
and the rest of the molecule is hydrophobic.
water
A Figure 5 Phospholipid bilayer
structure in water
CH,CH, CH, CH
Cholesterol is a sterol. The body manufactures cholesterol primarily
in the liver and intestines. It has an important role in the formation
of cell membranes, becoming positioned between the phospholipids
with the hydroxyl group at the periphery of the membrane. This adds
stability to cell membranes and regulates their fluidity by keeping
membranes fluid at low temperatures and stopping them becoming
too fluid at high temperatures.
cholesterol
CH CH, CH
CH3
CH3
Vitamin D, steroid hormones, and bile are all manufactured
using cholesterol.
HO
hydrophilic hydrophobic
Figure 6 Cholesterol has a characteristic
hydroxyl group and four carbon rings
Roles of lipids
Due to their non-polar nature, lipids have many biological roles.
These include:
membrane formation and the creation of hydrophobic barriers
• hormone production
electrical insulation necessary for impulse transmission
waterproofing, for example in birds' feathers and on plant leaves.
Synoptic link
You will learn about the roles
of lipids in cell membranes in
topic 5.1, The structure and
function of membranes.
Lipids, triglycerides in particular, also have an important role in
long-term energy storage. They are stored under the skin and around
vital organs, where they also provide:
thermal insulation to reduce heat loss for example, in penguins
cushioning to protect vital organs such as the heart and kidneys
buoyancy for aquatic animals like whales.
56
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
Saturated and unsaturated
Fatty acid chains that have no double bonds present between the
carbon atoms are called saturated, because all the carbon atoms form
the maximum number of bonds with hydrogen atoms (i.e., they are
saturated with hydrogen atoms).
saturated
(no double bonds between carbon atoms)
H H H H H H H H H.
0
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
A fatty acid with double bonds between some of the carbon atoms
is called unsaturated. If there is just one double bond it is called
monounsaturated. If there are two or more double bonds it is called
polyunsaturated. The presence of double bonds causes the molecule
to kink or bend (Figure 2) and they therefore cannot pack so closely
together. This makes them liquid at room temperature rather than
solid, and they are therefore described as oils rather than fats.
mono-unsaturated
(one double bond between carbon atoms)
o H H H H H H
C-C-C-C-C-C-Csi
OHHHHH
HH
Plants contain unsaturated triglycerides, which normally occur as
oils, and tend to be more healthy in the human diet than saturated
triglycerides, or (solid) fats. There has been some evidence that in
excess, saturated fats can lead to coronary heart disease, however the
evidence remains inconclusive. An excess of any type of fat can lead to
obesity, which also puts a strain on the heart.
polyunsaturated
(more than one double bond between
carbon atoms)
o H H H
C-C-C-C
I-Oo
0-I
Phospholipids
Phospholipids are modified triglycerides and contain the
The double bonds cause the molecule
element phosphorus along with carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
to bend. They cannot therefore pack
Inorganic phosphate ions (PO3-) are found in the cytoplasm of
together so closely making them liquid
every cell. The phosphate ions have extra electrons and so are
at room temperature, i.e they are oils.
negatively charged, making them soluble in water.
A Figure 2 Saturated and unsaturated
One of the fatty acid chains in a triglyceride molecule is replaced
fatty acids
with a phosphate group to make a phospholipid.
(a) chemical structure of a phospholipid
non-polar long chain
CH,COO
fatty acid
hydrocarbons
hydrophobic
CHCOO
fatty acid
(repel water)
charged end of
molecule
hydrophilic
---CH2
(attracts water)
phosphate
Study tip
(b) simplified way to draw a phospholipid
Polar or charged molecules and
non-polar molecules should not
be described as 'water loving'and
'water hating' but as hydrophilic
and hydrophobic.
charged (hydrophilic) head non-polar (hydrophobic) tails
A Figure 3 Structure of a phospholipid
Phospholipids are unusual because, due to their length, they have
a non-polar end or tail (the fatty acid chains) and a charged end or
head (the phosphate group). The non-polar tails are repelled by water
(but mix readily with fat). They are hydrophobic. The charged
heads (often incorrectly called polar ends) will interact with, and are
attracted to, water. They are hydrophilic.
55
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
Bonding follows some simple rules, determined by the number of
unpaired electrons present in the outer orbitals of different elements:
Carbon atoms can form four bonds with other atoms.
Nitrogen atoms can form three bonds with other atoms.
Oxygen atoms can form two bonds with other atoms.
• Hydrogen atoms can only form one bond with another atom.
Table 1 Hydrogen atoms can only form one bond with other atoms. Carbon atoms can form four bonds,
nitrogen three and oxygen two. The dots and crosses represent electrons and which atom they belong to
Molecule
Electron diagram
Displayed formula
'Ball and stick' model
Hydrogen (H)
H—
H
Water (H,0)
Carbon dioxide (CO)
o=c=0
Methane (CH)
H-
C-
H
H-
N-
H
Ammonia (NH)
The number of bonds formed by these elements can be no more or less
than stated. There are, however, exceptions to this rule, which you
will learn about in later sections. Life on this planet is often referred
to as being 'carbon-based' because carbon, which can form four bonds,
forms the backbone of most biological molecules.
lons
An atom or molecule in which the total number of electrons is not
equal to the total number of protons is called an ion. If an atom or
molecule loses one or more electrons it has a net positive charge and
is known as a cation. If an atom or molecule gains electrons, it has a
net negative charge and is known as an anion.
In ionic bonds, one atom in the pair donates an electron and the other
and negative ions that are held together
by the attraction of the opposite charges.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
a Describe the relationship shown by
the graph.
(4 marks)
b Explain why ribosomes are necessary in
protein synthesis.
(3 marks)
C Assuming a constant rate of translation
explain the trend shown by the graph.
(4 marks)
The diagram below summarises the flow of
information between DNA, RNA and protein.
Your drawing should show:
• The bond(s) between the two molecules
The name of the bond
The charges on each atom (3 marks)
OCR F212 2010
8
DNA
A
RNA -
→ protein
B
a Suggest which processes are happening at
A and B on the diagram. (2 marks)
b Explain why there is no arrow between
DNA and protein.
(3 marks)
Viruses are often incorporated into DNA
within the nucleus of infected cells.
c Suggest why an arrow could also be
drawn going from RNA to DNA. (2 marks)
9 Compare the structure and function of ATP
and a DNA nucleotide.
(5 marks)
10 The diagram represents a water molecule
Water molecules are polar. As a result, they
attract each other.
Draw a second water molecule on the
diagram
11 a Ponds provide a very stable environment
for aquatic organisms.
Three properties that contribute to this
stability are as follows:
• The density of water decreases as the
temperature falls below 4 °C so ice floats
on the top of the bond
It acts as a solvent for ions such as
nitrates (NO)
A large quantity of energy is required to
raise the temperature of water by 1°C.
Explain how these three properties help
organisms survive in the pond.
In you answer you should make clear the links
between the behaviour of the water molecules and
the survival of the organisms.
(8 marks)
b Water is important in many biological
questions.
Complete table 1 by writing an
appropriate term next to each description.
term
description
The type of reaction that
occurs when water is added
to break a bond in a molecule
The phosphate group of a
phospholipid that readily
attracts water molecules
OCR F212 2010
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
As water is involved in the removal of the phosphate group this is
another example of a hydrolysis reaction.
energy
ATP +
adenosine
triphosphate
H2O
water
+ ADP
adenosine
diphosphate
+ P +
inorganic
phosphate
The hydrolysis of ATP does not happen in isolation but in association
with energy-requiring reactions. The reactions are said to be 'coupled'
as they happen simultaneously.
energy released for use by cells
ATP is hydrolysed into adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and a phosphate
ion, releasing energy.
hydrolysis
(H20
ATP
ADP + P
adenosine
triphosphate (ATP)
P-P-P
energy
condensation
> P + P-PG
inorganic
phosphate
adenosine
diphosphate (ADP)
inorgan
Figure 3 The hydrolysis of ATP to ADP releases energy
energy supplied from respiration
A Figure 4 Interconversion of ATP
and ADP
Study tip
The instability of the phosphate bonds in ATP, however, means that
it is not a good long-term energy store. Fats and carbohydrates are
much better for this. The energy released in the breakdown of
these molecules (a process called cellular respiration) is used to
create ATP. This occurs by reattaching a phosphate group to an ADP
molecule. The process is called phosphorylation. As water is removed
in this process, the reaction is another example of a condensation
reaction.
Make sure you know the
characteristics that make ATP
so useful as the universal
energy currency.
Summary questions
Due to the instability of ATP, cells do not store large amounts of
it. However, ATP is rapidly reformed by the phosphorylation of
ADP (Figure 4). This interconversion of ATP and ADP is happening
constantly in all living cells, meaning cells do not need a large store of
ATP. ATP is therefore a good immediate energy store.
1 Describe the structure of ATP.
(3 marks)
2 Describe why ATP is
called the universal
energy currency. (3 marks)
Properties of ATP
The structure and properties of ATP mean that it is ideally suited
to carry out its function in energy transfer. A summary of these
properties is given below.
Small – moves easily into, out of and within cells.
• Water soluble-energy-requiring processes happen in aqueous
environments.
Contains bonds between phosphates with intermediate energy:
large enough to be useful for cellular reactions but not so large
that energy is wasted as heat.
Releases energy in small quantities - quantities are suitable to
most cellular needs, so that energy is not wasted as heat.
• Easily regenerated - can be recharged with energy.
3 People and other animals
store excess energy in the
form of fat. Explain why fat
is stored, not ATP? (4 marks)
4 a Outline how energy is
transferred with reference
to bond formation and
cleavage. (2 marks)
Discuss the validity of
the statement: ATP is the
universal energy currency.
(4 marks)
Chapter 3 Practice questions
a
Identify A, B, C and D on the diagram
below.
(4 marks)
Practice questions
Water has a very simple molecular structure but
is a vital component of living organisms. Water
has many roles such as metabolite, solvent and
reaction medium. It is also the environment in
which many organisms live.
1 a Define the word 'molecule'. (2 marks)
b Explain what is meant by the term
'polar' with reference to water. (2 marks)
c Water has an essential role as a transport
medium in both plants and animals.
Explain why water makes an ideal
transport medium using two examples.
(4 marks)
2 A colorimeter can be used to estimate the
concentration of a solution of reducing sugar.
This is done by carrying out Benedict's test on
the solution, allowing the precipitate to settle
and measuring the absorbance of the liquid
portion or supernatant.
Describe how you could estimate the
concentration of a solution of glucose without
using a colorimeter.
(5 marks)
Copy and fill in the table below.
The first row has been done for you.
(3 marks)
Feature
Cellulose Collagen
OH
b Explain why nucleic acids are described
as polymers.
(2 marks)
c Outline the differences between DNA
and RNA.
(2 marks)
d Chargaff's rule states that the ratios of
adenine to thymine and guanine to
cytosine in DNA are equal.
(i) Explain, using your knowledge of the
structure of DNA why the bases in
DNA always obey this rule.
(4 marks)
(ii) Suggest what has happened during
replication if a section of DNA does
not obey this rule.
(3 marks)
The graph below shows how the ratio of
ribosome synthesis to total protein synthesis
changes as the rate of cell division in a
bacterial colony increases.
Fibrous
7
Monomers joined by
condensation reactions
Monomers identical
Branching
0.3
4
a Describe the difference between
hydrophobic and hydrophilic using
phospholipid molecules as an example.
(4 marks)
b Describe how you would identify the
presence of a lipid in an unknown sample.
(4 marks)
Explain the meaning of prosthetic group with
reference to haemoglobin.
(4 marks)
ratio of ribosomal protein synthesis:
total protein synthesis
5
2
doublings per hour
3.11 ATP
Specification reference: 2.1.3 and 2.1.2
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the structure of ADP and
ATP as nucleotides
the hydrolysis and
condensation reactions
involving ATP and ADP.
Universal energy currency
Muscle contraction, cell division, the transmission of nerve impulses,
and even memory formation are just some of the many biological
processes that require energy. Energy comes in many forms, such
as heat, light, and the energy in chemical bonds. Energy has to be
supplied in the right form and quantity to the processes that
require it.
Cells require energy for three main types of activity:
• synthesis – for example of large molecules such as proteins
transport - for example pumping molecules or ions across cell
membranes by active transport
• movement - for example protein fibres in muscle cells that cause
muscle contraction.
Study tip
You might be asked about the
similarities and differences
between ATP structure and DNA
and RNA nucleotide structure.
Make sure you understand these.
Inside cells, molecules of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) are able to
supply this energy in such a way that it can be used.
An ATP molecule is composed of a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar
and three phosphate groups, as shown in Figure 1 - it is a nucleotide.
You will notice that the structure of ATP is very similar to that of the
nucleotides involved in the structure of DNA and RNA (Topic 3.8,
Figure 1). However, in ATP the base is always adenine and there are
three phosphate groups instead of one. The sugar in ATP is ribose, as
in RNA nucleotides.
O-P-0
=0
Phosphate group
adenine
HOCH
OO-I
ribose
IO-
OH
OH
A Figure 1 The structure of an ATP molecule
Ribose
NH
ATP is used for energy transfer in all cells of all living things. Hence it
is known as the universal energy currency.
N-
CN
Adenine
How ATP releases energy
Energy is needed to break bonds and is released when bonds are
formed. A small amount of energy is needed to break the relatively
weak bond holding the last phosphate group in ATP. However,
a large amount of energy is then released when the liberated
phosphate undergoes other reactions involving bond formation.
Overall a lot more energy is released than used, approximately
30.6 kJ mol-1.
Figure 2 The structure of a
phosphate group, the pentose sugar
ribose, and the nitrogenous base
adenine
80
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
1
-
2-
3
-4
of amino acids in the primary structure. The protein may
undergo further modifications at the Golgi apparatus
(Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic cell structure) before it is fully
functional and and ready to carry out the specific role for
which it has been synthesised.
polypeptide chain
FZH-IT-01-6-8-1-9-
Many ribosomes can follow on the mRNA behind the
first, so that multiple identical polypeptides can be
synthesised simultaneously (Figure 6).
2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-10-10
3-14-15-16-17-18-
tRNA
-2-3
- ribosome
direction
of movement
of ribosome
Figure 6 The formation of multiple identical proteins
simultaneously by translation of one mRNA by several
ribosomes
VIU LTH
mRNA
Summary questions
1 Copy and complete the diagram below to
show the missing bases forming the tRNA
anticodons.
(4 marks)
(2 marks)
DNA
TAC
CGG
AGT
GCA
3 a An enzyme forms part of the structure
of ribosome. Suggest the role of this
enzyme.
b rRNA also forms part of the structure.
Suggest why RNA needs to be present
in a ribosome.
c Ribosomes are either free floating within
the cytoplasm or bound to endoplasmic
reticulum. Suggest a reason for the
different ribosomal sites.
(2 marks)
mRNA
AUG
GCC
UCA
CGU
(2 marks)
tRNA
met
ser
2 Describe the roles of mRNA, RNA and rRNA in
protein synthesis
(5 marks)
4 Post-transcriptional modification of mRNA is carried
out before it can leave the nucleus. This involves
'capping' each end to protect the mRNA from
degradation in the cytoplasm and the removal of
introns. Introns are non-coding sections of DNA and
have no role in the formation of proteins.
a Explain why unnecessary base sequences
must be removed before protein synthesis
begins.
(4 marks)
b Suggest an advantage of being able to
edit mRNA
(2 marks)
c Suggest a reason for the presence of
introns within genes.
(4 marks)
3.7 Types of proteins
The structure of fibrous proteins
elastin
Elastin
Elastin is made by linking many soluble tropoelastin
protein molecules to make a very large, insoluble, and
stable, cross-linked structure (Figure 4).
Tropoelastin molecules are able to stretch and recoil
without breaking, acting like small springs. They contain
alternate hydrophobic and lysine-rich areas.
relaxing
stretching
Elastin is formed when multiple tropoelastin molecules
aggregate via interactions between the hydrophobic
areas. The structure is stabilised by cross-linking
covalent bonds involving the amino acid lysine, but the
polypeptide structure still has flexibility.
single tropoelastin molecule
cross-link
Elastin confers strength and elasticity to the skin and
other tissues and organs in the body.
Collagen
Figure 4 The structure of elastin allows it to be stretched
without breaking
(a)
Collagen molecules have three polypeptide chains
wound around each other in a triple helix structure to
form a tough, rope-like protein (Figure 5d and e).
ligament tissue
(b)
Every third amino acid in the polypeptide chains is
glycine, which is a small amino acid. Its small size allows
the three protein molecules to form a closely packed
triple helix. Many hydrogen bonds form between the
polypeptide chains forming long quaternary proteins
with staggered ends (Figure 5d). These allow the proteins
to join end to end, forming long fibrils called tropocollagen
(Figure 5c). The tropocollagen fibrils cross-link to
produce strong fibres.
multiple triple-helix proteins
wound to form a microfibril
cross-linking
Collagen also contains high proportions of the amino
acids proline and hydroxyproline. The R-groups in these
amino acids repel each other and this adds to the stability
of collagen
In some tissues, multiple fibres of collagen aggregate
into larger bundles (Figure 5a). This is the structure
found in ligaments and tendons. In skin, collagen fibres
form a mesh that is resistant to tearing
staggered ends
fropocollagen
(d)
three polypeptide chains form a triple helix - collagen
(e)
Figure 5 (a) A ligament is composed of a bundle of
(b) collagen microfibrils. Each collagen microfibril is composed
of (c) multiple triple-helix proteins wound together with
staggered ends so that the individual polypeptides overlap,
forming a very strong structure
single polypeptide chain
66
3.9 DNA replication and
the genetic code
Specification reference: 2.1.3
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ semi-conservative DNA
replication
► the nature of the genetic code.
Cells divide to produce more cells needed for growth or repair of
tissues. The two daughter cells produced as a result of cell division
are genetically identical to the parent cell and to each other. In other
words, they contain DNA with a base sequence identical to the
original parent cell.
When a cell prepares to divide, the two strands of DNA double helix
separate and each strand serves as a template for the creation of a
new double-stranded DNA molecule. The complementary base pairing
rules, which you learnt about in the previous topic, ensure that the
two new strands are identical to the original. This process is called
DNA replication.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about cell
division in Topic 6.2, Mitosis.
Semi-conservative replication
For DNA to replicate, the double helix structure has to unwind and
then separate into two strands, so the hydrogen bonds holding the
complementary bases together must be broken (Figure 1c). Free
DNA nucleotides will then pair with their complementary bases,
which have been exposed as the strands separate. Hydrogen bonds
are formed between them. Finally, the new nucleotides join to their
adjacent nucleotides with phosphodiester bonds (Figure 1d).
In this way, two new molecules of DNA are produced. Each one
consists of one old strand of DNA and one new strand. This is known
as semi-conservative (meaning half the same) replication.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about enzymes
in Chapter 4, Enzymes.
Roles of enzymes in replication
DNA replication is controlled by enzymes, a class of proteins that act
as catalysts for biochemical reactions. Enzymes are only able to carry
out their function by recognising and attaching to specific molecules or
particular parts of the molecules.
Before replication can occur, the unwinding and separating of
the two strands of the DNA double helix is carried out by the
enzyme DNA helicase. It travels along the DNA backbone,
catalysing reactions that break the hydrogen bonds between
complementary base pairs as it reaches them. This can be thought
of as the strand 'unzipping'.
Free nucleotides pair with the newly exposed bases on the
template strands during the 'unzipping process. A second enzyme,
DNA polymerase catalyses the formation of phosphodiester bonds
between these nucleotides.
72
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
Hy
O
-
I
To get around this problem, the relatively short section of the long
DNA molecule corresponding to a single gene is transcribed into a
base
similarly short messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule. Each individual
mRNA is therefore much shorter than the whole chromosome of
DNA. It is a polymer composed of many nucleotide monomers.
uracil
phosphate
RNA nucleotides are different to DNA nucleotides as the pentose
sugar is ribose rather than deoxyribose (Figure 3) and the
0-- P— 0+
thymine base is replaced with the base uracil (U) (see Figure 9).
ribose
Like thymine, uracil is a pyrimidine that forms two hydrogen
bonds with adenine. Therefore the base pairing rules still apply
sugar
when RNA nucleotides bind to DNA to make copies of particular
TH
sections of DNA.
OH
A Figure 8 The thymine base is replaced with
The RNA nucleotides form polymers in the same way as DNA
uracil in RNA nucleotides. The sugar is ribose
nucleotides - by the formation of phosphodiester bonds in
not deoxyribose
condensation reactions. The RNA polymers formed are small
enough to leave the nucleus and travel to the ribosomes, where they
are central in the process of protein synthesis.
Synoptic link
After protein synthesis the RNA molecules are degraded in the
You will learn more about
cytoplasm. The phosphodiester bonds are hydrolysed and the RNA
transcription and translation in
nucleotides are released and reused.
protein synthesis in Topic 3.9, DNA
replication and the genetic code
and Topic 3.10, Protein synthesis.
OH
DNA extraction
DNA can be extracted from plant material using the following procedure:
Summary questions
1 Describe the differences
between DNA and RNA
nucleotides. (2 marks)
• Grind sample in a mortar and pestle -
this breaks down the cell walls.
Mix sample with detergent - this
breaks down the cell membrane,
releasing the cell contents into solution.
Add salt - this breaks the hydrogen
bonds between the DNA and
water molecules.
Add protease enzyme - this will
break down the proteins associated
with the DNA in the nuclei.
Add a layer of alcohol (ethanol) on top
of the sample - alcohol causes the
A Figure 9 DNA as a white
precipitate
DNA to precipitate out of solution.
The DNA will be seen as white strands forming between the layer of
sample and layer of alcohol (Figure 9). The DNA can be picked up by
'spooling' it onto a glass rod.
2 Explain the base
pairing rule. (3 marks)
3 Explain how the structure
of DNA is ideally suited
to its role.
(4 marks)
A sample of DNA was tested
and 17% of the total bases
present were found to
be adenine.
Calculate the percentages
of each of the other three
bases present in this
sample. Show all of
your working. (3 marks)
1 The temperature should be kept low throughout this DNA extraction
procedure. Suggest why.
2 Explain why detergent breaks down cell membranes.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
Catalase
Catalase is an enzyme. Enzymes catalyse reactions, meaning they
increase reaction rates, and each enzyme is specific to a particular
reaction or type of reaction.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
haemoglobin and its role in the
transport of oxygen in Topic 8.4,
Transport of oxygen and carbon
dioxide in the blood.
Catalase is a quaternary protein containing four haem prosthetic groups.
The presence of the iron II ions in the prosthetic groups allow catalase to
interact with hydrogen peroxide and speed up its breakdown. Hydrogen
peroxide is a common byproduct of metabolism but is damaging to cells
and cell components if allowed to accumulate. Catalase makes sure this
doesn't happen.
Synoptic link
You will learn about enzymes in
Chapter 4, Enzymes.
Fibrous proteins
Fibrous proteins are formed from long, insoluble molecules. This
is due to the presence of a high proportion of amino acids with
hydrophobic R-groups in their primary structures. They contain a
limited range of amino acids, usually with small R-groups. The amino
acid sequence in the primary structure is usually quite repetitive.
This leads to very organised structures reflected in the roles fibrous
proteins often have. Keratin, elastin, and collagen are examples of
fibrous proteins.
Study tip
You are not required to learn
the detailed structure of fibrous
proteins, but an overview is useful
in understanding their properties
and functions. Details of the
structure of fibrous proteins are
given in the Extension.
Fibrous proteins tend to make strong, long molecules which are not
folded into complex three-dimensional shapes like globular proteins.
Keratin
Keratin is a group of fibrous proteins present in hair, skin, and nails.
It has a large proportion of the sulfur-containing amino acid, cysteine.
This results in many strong disulfide bonds (disulfide bridges) forming
strong, inflexible, and insoluble materials. The degree of disulfide
bonds determines the flexibility - hair contains fewer bonds making it
more flexible than nails, which contain more bonds. The unpleasant
smell produced when hair or skin is burnt is due to the presence of
relatively large quantities of sulfur in these proteins.
Elastin
Elastin is a fibrous protein found in elastic fibres (along with small
protein fibres). Elastic fibres are present in the walls of blood
vessels and in the alveoli of the lungs - they give these structures
the flexibility to expand when needed, but also to return to their
normal size. Elastin is a quaternary protein made from many stretchy
molecules called tropoelastin (see the Extension, The structure of
fibrous proteins, for further detail of structure).
Figure 3 A coloured SEM image of
eyelash hairs growing from the surface of
human skin. The shafts of hair are made
up of the fibrous protein, keratin. x 50
magnification
Collagen
Collagen is another fibrous protein. It is a connective tissue found in
skin, tendons, ligaments and the nervous system. There are a number
of different forms but all are made up of three polypeptides wound
together in a long and strong rope-like structure. Like rope, collagen
has flexibility (see the Extension, The structure of fibrous proteins, for
further detail of structure).
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the role
of elastin in blood vessels in
Topic 8.2, Blood vessels.
3
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
Identification of lipids
Lipids can be identified in the laboratory by a simple test known as the
emulsion test. First, the sample is mixed with ethanol. The resulting
solution is mixed with water and shaken. If a white emulsion forms as
a layer on top of the solution this indicates the presence of a lipid. If
the solution remains clear the text is negative.
Changing health advice
It can be confusing because health advice constantly changes. The
way that new advice is issued in the media from new findings is
partly responsible. The validity of the research has not usually been
evaluated, the science is often not easy to explain, and as the majority
of the general public do not have scientific background they are
not aware of the fluid nature of scientific understanding. Scientific
knowledge is also constantly changing as technology develops and so
our understanding of biological processes increases.
It is often difficult to isolate the effect of just one nutrient and, in fact,
it is now generally believed that nutrients do not work in isolation but
as part of the combined effect of a whole range of nutrients. This is
called food synergy. For example whole grains are believed to have a
greater beneficial effect than any of their individual components and
it is the combined effect of fish, fruit and vegetables that help prevent
certain types of heart disease.
The data used in reports is often flawed, particularly where diet is
concerned, as the subjects involved in studies often do not provide
accurate information. People tend to underestimate what they eat,
they forget what they have eaten and don't often know the exact
ingredients of meals, particularly if they are eating out. People are
also different due to their genetic make up and therefore respond
differently to different nutrients.
The studies that catch the headlines often involve small numbers
of subjects and these inherent differences distort the findings. The
resulting headlines can be eye-catching, but not very accurate, and are
often contradicted by the next study.
Fats in our diet
Previously it was thought that saturated fats did cause heart
disease, but more recent evidence has contradicted this.
The presence of a double bond in a fatty acid leads to a
kink in the chain causing the lipid to be more liquid in
nature and, as you will discover in later sections, a more
healthy component of the diet than saturated fats.
Plants contain unsaturated triglycerides, which normally
occur as oils.
Margarine versus butter
Butter is an animal fat made from cows' milk and is
therefore high in saturated lipids. Various alternatives to
butter have been developed over the last 200 years with
the focus initially being to find cheaper or longer-lasting
substitutes. More recently the aim has been to produce
a more 'healthy' substitute for butter.
Animals (but generally not fish) contain saturated
triglycerides, or (solid) fats. As mentioned, the evidence
that saturated fats cause heart diseases is inconclusive.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
deoxyribose
The nucleotides in DNA each have one of
four different bases. This means there are four
different DNA nucleotides, see Figure 4. The four
bases can be divided into two groups:
HOHC
O
OH
Figure 3 The sugar in DNA is
deoxyribose (top) and the sugar
in RNA is ribose (bottom).
Deoxyribose has one less oxygen
atom than ribose
ribose
OH
. Pyrimidines – the smaller bases, which
contain single carbon ring structures -
thymine (T) and cytosine (C)
Purines - the larger bases, which contain
double carbon ring structures - adenine (A)
and guanine (G).
HOHC
0
OH
OH
OH
pyrimidines
purines
Study tip
----HN
Hąc
NCH
You do not need to remember the
chemical structure of the bases,
but you should remember that:
NO
NH-====
deoxyribose
deoxyribose
thymine
adenine
The comparative sizes of
pyrimidines and purines is
due to the presence of either a
single ring or a double ring. The
complementary pair thymine
and adenine form two hydrogen
bonds and the complementary pair
cytosine and guanine form three
hydrogen bonds and purines pair
with pyrimidines.
==HN
deoxyribose
deoxyribose
-===-H.N
cytosine
guanine
Figure 4 The chemical structure of the four different bases in DNA showing
hydrogen bonding between complementary pairs
The double helix
The DNA molecule varies in length from a few nucleotides to millions
of nucleotides. It is made up of two strands of polynucleotides coiled
into a helix, known as the DNA double helix, see Figure 6.
The two strands of the double helix are held together by hydrogen
bonds between the bases, much like the rungs of a ladder. Each
strand has a phosphate group (5') at one end and a hydroxyl
group (3') at the other end. The two parallel strands are arranged
so that they run in opposite directions (Figure 5) - they are said to
be antiparallel.
Study tip
When referring to DNA, the
molecule is the double helix
composed of two antiparallel
strands. Each strand is one chain
of nucleotides (a polynucleotide).
The pairing between the bases allows DNA to be copied and
transcribed - key properties required of the molecule of heredity.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
This test is known as the biuret test. A mixture of an alkali and copper
sulfate solution is called biuret reagent and can be used instead of adding
the solutions individually.
1 State the colour you would expect to see on addition of the copper
sulfate solution if protein is present in the sample.
2 State the colour you would expect to see if the sample contained
amino acids instead of proteins.
Explain the reason for this colour.
3 Suggest why this test is not used quantitatively.
Summary questions
1 Draw the structure of an amino acid.
(3 marks)
2 Describe the formation of a peptide bond.
(3 marks)
3 a Draw a box identifying the peptide bond in the diagram below.
(1 mark)
HH OHH O
N—C—C—N—C—C
DOS
HR
OH
(2 marks)
b Describe how hydrogen bonds form within the secondary
structure of proteins.
Alpha keratin, a protein found in sheep's wool, is primarily
composed of alpha helices. Explain why alpha keratin
has a more regular structure than the quaternary protein
haemoglobin.
(3 marks)
4 Compare and contrast the role of R-group interactions in the
formation of the tertiary and quaternary structures of proteins. (6 marks)
3.7 Types of proteins
Specification reference: 2.1.2
In the previous topic you saw how the complex tertiary and quaternary
structures of proteins are built up. These structures determine the role
the protein will play in the body. The two main groups are globular
proteins and fibrous proteins.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the structure and function of
globular proteins including a
conjugated protein
► the properties and functions
of fibrous proteins.
Globular proteins
Globular proteins are compact, water soluble, and usually roughly
spherical in shape. They form when proteins fold into their tertiary
structures in such a way that the hydrophobic R-groups on the amino
acids are kept away from the aqueous environment. The hydrophilic
R-groups are on the outside of the protein. This means the proteins
are soluble in water.
This solubility is important for the many different functions of globular
proteins. They are essential for regulating many of the processes necessary
to life. As you will see in later sections, these include processes such as
chemical reactions, immunity, muscle contraction, and many more.
Insulin
A Figure 1 Insulin. The complex shape
of a globular protein formed from the
folding of the primary structure into
secondary structures (helices), which are
further folded into the tertiary structure
Insulin is a globular protein. It is a hormone involved in the regulation
of blood glucose concentration. Hormones are transported in the
bloodstream so need to be soluble. Hormones also have to fit into
specific receptors on cell-surface membranes to have their effect and
therefore need to have precise shapes.
Synoptic link
You will learn about hormones
in Chapter 14, Hormonal
communication
Conjugated proteins
Conjugated proteins are globular proteins that contain a non-protein
component called a prosthetic group. Proteins without prosthetic
groups are called simple proteins.
There are different types of prosthetic groups. Lipids or carbohydrates
can combine with proteins forming lipoproteins or glycoproteins.
Metal ions and molecules derived from vitamins also form prosthetic
groups. These are called cofactors when they are necessary for the
proteins to carry out their functions.
Haem groups are examples of prosthetic groups. They contain an iron i
ion (Fe2+). Catalase and haemoglobin both contain haem groups.
A Figure 2 Haemoglobin. Four subunits
are each wrapped around a haem group
(red), protecting it from being oxidised and
destroyed by the oxygen it is intended to
transport. The iron within each haem group
reversibly bonds to oxygen in the blood.
Four haemoglobin monomers (green,
beige, purple, blue) usually bind together
to form one large haemoglobin molecule
Haemoglobin
Haemoglobin is the red, oxygen-carrying pigment found in red
blood cells. It is a quaternary protein made from four polypeptides,
two alpha and two beta subunits (Figure 5, Topic 3.6, Structure of
proteins). Each subunit contains a prosthetic haem group. The iron in
ions present in the haem groups are each able to combine reversibly
with an oxygen molecule. This is what enables haemoglobin to
transport oxygen around the body. It can pick oxygen up in the lungs
and transport it to the cells that need it, where it is released.
64
3.8 Nucleic acids
5'
covalent bond
3
The 'backbones' are composed
of deoxyribose-phosphate
molecules, and the rungs
are pairs of bases.
3.4 nm
10 base pairs
WMWM
TA
GCS
hydrogen bonds are formed
between two bases
keys
-deoxyribose Ⓡ-phosphate
sugar
- nitrogenous bases
G
2.0nm -
>
A Figure 5 A simplified diagram of base
pairing in DNA
Figure 6 The double helix structure of DNA
5' end
3' end
Base pairing rules
The bases bind in a very specific way (Figure 7). Adenine and thymine
are both able to form two hydrogen bonds and always join with each
other. Cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds and so also only
bind to each other. This is known as complementary base pairing.
complementary
base pairs
Step
hydrogen
bonds
These rules mean that a small pyrimidine base always binds to a larger
purine base. This arrangement maintains a constant distance between
the DNA backbones', resulting in parallel polynucleotide chains.
P-
-P-S
P
Complementary base pairing means that DNA always has equal
amounts of adenine and thymine and equal amounts of cytosine and
guanine. This was known long before the detailed structure of DNA
was determined by Watson and Crick in 1953.
A-SA------SA
It is the sequence of bases along a DNA strand that carries the genetic
information of an organism in the form of a code. In the next topic we
will examine how the sequence of bases 'codes' for the sequences of
amino acids that are needed to make different proteins.
sugar-phosphate
backbone
A-S-AS-
AS-A-
PS-PS3
X3'end
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) plays an essential role in the transfer
of genetic information from DNA to the proteins that make up
the enzymes and tissues of the body. DNA stores all of the genetic
information needed by an organism, which is passed on from
generation to generation. However, the DNA of each eukaryotic
chromosome is a very long molecule, comprising many hundreds
of genes, and is unable to leave the nucleus in order to supply the
information directly to the sites of protein synthesis.
5' end
Figure 7 The DNA double helix -
showing complementary base pairing
and antiparallel strands
70
3.5 Lipids
With more focus on producing healthy alternatives to
butter, and improvements in the manufacturing process,
many spreads now contain less, if any, hydrogenated
fats. Mono- and polyunsaturated plant oils are used
instead and these have been shown to reduce high
cholesterol levels, which are a factor in the development
of coronary heart disease.
The main problem faced initially by food scientists was
that the vegetable oils used to produce the 'substitute
butters' are more liquid than the animal fats in milk.
This was overcome by using hydrogen to saturate, or
removing the double bonds from, the unsaturated fatty
acids in the vegetable oils. Solid hydrogenated fat was
produced and the oil was said to be have been hardened.
The fat was then coloured and sometimes mixed
with butter to improve the taste. Different degrees of
hardening, colouring and mixing with butter gave rise to
the many different margarines on the market.
An unwanted byproduct of the hardening process was
the production of trans fats. These are unsaturated lipids
in which the kinks that the double bonds naturally form
in the fatty acid chains have been reversed. Trans fats,
which actually increase the shelf life of baked products,
have more recently been linked with the development
of coronary heart disease and are now usually removed
from foods.
Reduced fat spreads
Lipids release the same quantity of energy gram for gram
when respired whether saturated or unsaturated, so
butter and margarine have always had the same calorific
value. More recently the focus has been to reduce the
overall fat content in such spreads.
1 Explain how hardening vegetable oils produces
solid fats.
2 Explain why it is considered more healthy to have
a low overall fat content as well as a low saturated
fat content in a spread.
Summary questions
1 Using your knowledge of the structure of fatty acids, describe why oils are liquid and fats are
solid at room temperature.
(4 marks)
(4 marks)
2 Describe the formation and the hydrolysis of an ester bond.
3 Some bacteria are extremophiles
meaning they live in extreme
HC -O-P-0-
environments that are very
acidic or have very high
CH2 -0-C-H 0
temperatures. The phospholipids
\CH2 – CH2
present in other bacteria or
eukaryotic cells would be
C-0-CH2
broken down in such
extreme conditions.
-C-0-C-H O
Extremophiles have
H.C—0-P-O
membranes composed of
modified phospholipids.
a Identify which of the phospholipids in the diagram is present in the cell membrane of extremophiles. (1 mark)
b Outline the similarities and differences between the two types of phospholipid.
(3 marks)
c Suggest why the phospholipids in the membranes of extremophiles can withstand extremes
of temperature and pH.
(2 marks)
FOO=
O=
4 Read the following statements.
Lipids are not soluble in water.
Lipids and ethanol are soluble in water.
Water is more soluble than lipids in ethanol.
Use the information to explain how the emulsion test for lipids works.
(4 marks)
58
3.9 DNA replication and the genetic code
leading strand
wwwww
Replication errors
Sequences of bases are not always matched exactly, and an incorrect
parental DNA
sequence may occur in the newly-copied strand. These errors occur
-5 randomly and spontaneously and lead to a change in the sequence of
3' bases, known as a mutation.
Okazaki fragments
lagging strand
A Figure 2 As DNA polymerase only
travels in the 3'to 5' direction, only the
leading strand of DNA can be replicated
continuously as the DNA unwinds but
the lagging strand has to be replicated in
the opposite direction in short sections
called Okazaki fragments
Genetic code
DNA is contained within the cells of all organisms and scientists
determined that this molecule was the means by which genetic
information was passed from one generation to the next. But how
does this happen? Scientists understood that DNA must carry the
'instructions' or 'blueprint' needed to synthesise the many different
proteins needed by these organisms. Proteins are the foundation for
the different physical and biochemical characteristics of living things.
They are made up of a sequence of amino acids, folded into complex
structures. Therefore DNA must code for a sequence of amino acids.
This is called the genetic code.
codon
G
C
A
A triplet code
The instructions that DNA carries are contained in the sequence of bases
along the chain of nucleotides that make up the two strands of DNA.
The code in the base sequences is a simple triplet code. It is a sequence
of three bases, called a codon. Each codon codes for an amino acid.
A section of DNA that contains the complete sequence of bases
(codons) to code for an entire protein is called a gene.
1 codon = 1 amino acid
A Figure 3 A codon is a triplet of bases
that code for an amino acid
The genetic code is universal - all organisms use this same code,
although the sequences of bases coding for each individual protein
will be different.
Degenerate code
As you have learnt, there are four different bases, which means there
are 64 different base triplets or codons possible (43 or 4 x 4 x 4). This
includes one codon that acts as the start codon when it comes at the
beginning of a gene, signalling the start of a sequence that codes for
a protein. If it is in the middle of a gene, it codes for the amino acid
methionine. There are also three 'stop' codons that do not code for
any amino acids and signal the end of the sequence.
Having a single codon to signal the start of a sequence ensures that the
triplets of bases (codons) are read 'in frame'. In other words the DNA
base sequence is 'read' from base 1, rather than base 2 or 3. So the
genetic code is non-overlapping.
Study tip
Remember, the genetic code is
a triplet code. Three bases = one
codon. One codon codes for one
amino acid.
As there are only 20 different amino acids that regularly occur in
biological proteins, there are a lot more codons than amino acids.
Therefore, many amino acids can be coded for by more than one
codon, see Figure 4. Due to this, the code is known as degenerate.
74
3
3.6 Structure of proteins
different shapes being produced. The very specific shapes of proteins
are vital for the many functions proteins have within living organisms.
If you look at the way protein structures are built up in stages, it is
easier to understand what is happening.
Separating amino acids using thin layer chromatography
Thin layer chromatography (TLC) is a technique used to 6 The plate was left in the solvent until it had reached
separate the individual components of a mixture. The
about 2 cm from the top. The plate was then removed
technique can be used to separate and identify a mixture and a pencil line drawn along the solvent front. The
of amino acids in solution. There are two phases, the
plate was then allowed to dry.
stationary phase and the mobile phase which involves
The plate was then sprayed, in a fume cupboard, with
an organic solvent. The mobile phase picks up the amino ninhydrin spray. Amino acids react with ninhydrin
acids and moves through the stationary phase and the
and a purple/brown colour is produced. The centre of
amino acids are separated.
each spot present was then marked with a pencil.
In the stationary phase a thin layer of silica gel (or another
before spraying
Results after spraying
with ninhydrin
with ninhydrin
adhesive substance) is applied to a rigid surface, for
solvent
example a sheet of glass or metal. Amino acids are then
front
added to one end of the gel. This end is then submerged in
organic solvent. The organic solvent then moves through
the silica gel, this is known as the mobile phase.
phenylalanine
The rate at which the different amino acids in the organic
5cm
solvent move through the silica gel depends on the
proline
interactions (hydrogen bonds) they have with the silica
in the stationary phase, and their solubility in the mobile
glycine
phase. This results in different amino acids moving
different distances in the same time period resulting in
them separating out from each other.
Remember, when working with chemicals to take
care, wear safety glasses and report any spillages!
breakages to the teacher.
Here you can see the TLC plate showing the separated
amino acids appearing purple after spraying with ninhydrin.
A student carried out the following procedure to separate
and identify a mixture of amino acids in solution.
c.
1 Wearing gloves, the student drew a pencilline on the
chromatography plate about 2 cm from the bottom
edge. The plate was only handled by the edges.
2 Four equally spaced points were marked at along the
pencil line.
3 The amino acid solution was spotted onto the first
pencil mark using a capillary tube. The spot was
allowed to dry and then spotted again. The spot was
labelled using a pencil.
4 The three remaining marks were spotted with
solutions of three known amino acids.
5 The plate was then placed into a jar containing the
solvent. The solvent was no more than 1 cm deep.
The jar was then closed.
1 a Suggest why gloves were worn by the student
and the plate was only handled by the edges.
A mixture of solvents (such as hexane, water,
acetic acid, and butanol) is usually used as the
mobile phase when separating an unknown
mixture of amino acids. Suggest why.
C Explain why the solvent was no more than
1 cm deep.
d Suggest why the jar was sealed.
2 a Using the information provided identify as many of
the amino acids present in the solution as you can.
The distance an amino acid travels is determined
by the interactions it has with both the mobile
phase and the stationary phase. Different amino
acids will therefore move different distances in a
set time. As long as the conditions are kept
60
3
3.3 Carbohydrates
Another type of starch is formed when glycosidic bonds form in
condensation reactions between carbon 1 and carbon 6 on two glucose
molecules.
The other starch polysaccharide is called amylopectin. Amylopectin is
also made by 1-4 glycosidic bonds between alpha glucose molecules, but
(unlike amylose) in amylopectin there are also some glycosidic bonds
formed by condensation reactions between carbon 1 and carbon 6 on
two glucose molecules. this means that amylopectin has a branched
structure, with the 1-6 branching points occurring approximately once
in every 25 glucose subunits.
HO
CH,OH
CH
CH,OH
(OH
OH
+ H20
condensation
reaction
OH HO
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
glucose
glucose
(last in a glycogen molecule)
OH
OH
glucose
(last in a glycogen molecule)
1,6 glycosidic bonds
CH,OH 'CH,
OH
O
CH,OH CH2OH
1,4 glycosidic bonds
CH_OH ÇH_04 CHzo'onze CH2014 CH2CM CH204 CHO CHzob theo
KOH
H
KOH KOH KOH KOH
OV OYO
OH OH OH OH
KOH OH
OYOY SOLO
OH OH OH OH OH
OH
Figure 4 Formation of glycogen. Note that a new glucose chain starts to form from the main chain forming a branch
The functionally equivalent energy storage molecule to starch in
animals and fungi is called glycogen (Figure 4). Glycogen forms
more branches than amylopectin, which means it is more compact
and less space is needed for it to be stored. This is important as
48
3
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
CH,OH
-0
H
CH,OH
CH,OH
CHOH
-OH
condensation
KOH C1 C4 OH
KOH CI C4 OH
OH OH OH OH OH
1,4 glycosidic
OH
OH
bond
glucose
glucose
maltose
water
Figure 2 As the two OH are so close they react, forming a covalent bond called a glycosidic
bond between the two glucose molecules
OH
OH
As you can see in Figure 2, two hydrogen atoms and an oxygen atom
are removed from the glucose monomers and join to form a water
molecule. A bond forms between carbons 1 and 4 on the glucose
molecules and the molecules are now joined.
A covalent bond called a glycosidic bond is formed between two
glucose molecules. The reaction is called a condensation reaction
because a water molecule is formed as one of the products of the
reaction. Because in this reaction carbon 1 of one glucose molecule is
joined to carbon 4 of the other glucose molecule, the bond is known
as a 1,4 glycosidic bond. In this reaction the new molecule is called
maltose. This is an example of a disaccharide (a molecule made up
of two monosaccharides).
Other sugars
Fructose and galactose are also hexose monosaccharides. Fructose
naturally occurs in fruit, often in combination with glucose forming the
disaccharide sucrose, commonly known as cane sugar or just sugar.
Galactose and glucose form the disaccharide lactose. Lactose is
commonly found in milk and milk products.
Fructose is sweeter than glucose and glucose is sweeter than galactose.
Synoptic link
Pentose monosaccharides are sugars that contain five carbon
atoms. Two pentose sugars are important components of biological
molecules - ribose is the sugar present in RNA nucleotides and
deoxyribose is the sugar present in DNA nucleotides.
You will find out more about the
structure of nucleotides in
Topic 3.8, Nucleic acids.
Starch and glycogen
Many alpha glucose molecules can be joined by glycosidic bonds to
form two slightly different polysaccharides known collectively as
starch. Glucose made by photosynthesis in plant cells is stored as
starch. It is a chemical energy store.
One of the polysaccharides in starch is called amylose. Amylose is formed
by alpha glucose molecules joined together only by 1-4 glycosidic bonds.
The angle of the bond means that this long chain of glucose twists to
form a helix which is further stabilised by hydrogen bonding within the
molecule. This makes the polysaccharide more compact, and much less
soluble, than the glucose molecules used to make it.
Figure 3 The characteristic helix
shape of amylose
3.6 Structure of proteins
Specification reference: 2.1.2
Peptides are polymers made up of amino acid molecules (the
monomers). Proteins consist of one or more polypeptides arranged as
complex macromolecules and they have specific biological functions.
All proteins contain the elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen.
Amino acids
All amino acids have the same basic structure (Figure 1). Different
R-groups (variable groups) result in different amino acids. Twenty
different amino acids are commonly found in cells. Five of these are
said to be non-essential as our bodies are able to make them from
other amino acids. Nine are essential and can only be obtained from
what we eat. A further six are said to be conditionally essential as they
are only needed by infants and growing children.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the general structure of an
amino acid (monomer)
the synthesis and
breakdown of dipeptides and
polypeptides (polymers)
the levels of protein structure
→ how to carry out and interpret
the results of the biuret test
for proteins.
the principles of thin later
chromatography
amine group
Synthesis of peptides
Amino acids join when the amine and carboxylic acid groups
connected to the central carbon atoms react. The R-groups are not
involved at this point. The hydroxyl in the carboxylic acid group of
one amino acid reacts with a hydrogen in the amine group of another
amino acid. A peptide bond is formed between the amino acids and
water is produced (this is another example of a condensation reaction,
which you learnt about in Topic 3.3, Carbohydrates). The resulting
compound is a dipeptide.
R-group
a range of chemical
groups different in
each amino acid
amino
acid 1
R1 group-
-
R1 group-CO
condensation
peptide
bond
hydrolysis
ON
carboxyl group
water
molecule
Rygroup
-
Figure 1 The general structure of an
amino acid
R2 group-
-
dipeptide
amino
acid
200-
A Figure 2 Condensation reaction to form a peptide bond
Study tip
Learn this structure and remember
that the nitrogen-containing group is
an amine group not an amino group.
When many amino acids are joined together by peptide bonds a
polypeptide is formed. This reaction is catalysed by the enzyme
peptidyl transferase present in ribosomes, the sites of protein synthesis.
Synoptic link
The different R-groups of the amino acids making up a protein are able
to interact with each other (R-group interactions) forming different
types of bond. These bonds lead to the long chains of amino acids
(polypeptides) folding into complex structures (proteins). The presence
of different sequences of amino acids leads to different structures with
You will learn about protein
synthesis in the cell in Topic 3.10,
Protein synthesis.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
a A representative portion of DNA, which b An enzyme, DNA helicase, causes the
is about to undergo replication.
two strands of the DNA to separate.
C DNA helicase completes the separation of the
strand. Meanwhile, free nucleotides that have
been activated are attracted to their
complementary bases.
G
>free
nucleotides
e
d Once the activated nucleotides are lined up, they are
joined together by DNA polymerase (bottom three nucleotides).
The remaining unpaired bases continue to attract their
complementary nucleotides.
Finally, all the nucleotides are joined to form a complete polynucleotide
chain using DNA polymerase. In this way, two identical molecules of DNA
are formed. Each new molecule of DNA is composed of one original strand
and one newly formed molecule - semi-conservative replication.
G
5
original new
strandstrand
new original
strand ! strand
A Figure 1 The semi-conservative replication of DNA
Continuous and discontinuous replication
This results in DNA being produced in sections (called
Okazaki fragments), which then have to be joined. This
strand is called the lagging strand and is said to undergo
discontinuous replication.
DNA polymerase always moves along the template strand
in the same direction. It can only bind to the 3' (OH)
end, so travels in the direction of 3' to 5'. As DNA only
unwinds and unzips in one direction, DNA polymerase
has to replicate each of the template strands in opposite
directions. The strand that is unzipped from the 3' end
can be continuously replicated as the strands unzip. This
strand is called the leading strand and is said to undergo
continuous replication.
1 Describe the difference between continuous
and discontinuous replication.
(4 marks)
Using your knowledge of enzymes, explain
why DNA polymerase does not catalyse
the joining of Okazaki fragments into
a single strand but a different enzyme
(DNA ligase) is used.
(3 marks)
The other strand is unzipped from the 5' end, so DNA
polymerase has to wait until a section of the strand
has unzipped and then work back along the strand.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
the same, the same amino will always travel the
same distance in the same time.
The retention value (Rf) for each amino acid is
the distance travelled by the pigment divided by
the distance travelled by the solvent, it can be
calculated using the formula:
distance travelled by component
R=-
distance travelled by solvent
This will be constant for each amino acid tested
under identical conditions,
Calculate the Rf value for the two unidentified
spots and, using the standard Rf values below,
identify the amino acid.
Alanine 0.31
Cysteine 0.40
Aspartic acid 0.24
Methionine 0.49
Phenylalanine 0.59 Glutamine 0.13
(a) alpha helix
O=0
Z-1
Levels of protein structure
Primary structure - this is the sequence in which the amino acids are
joined. It is directed by information carried within DNA (discussed
further in Topic 3.8, Nucleic acids and Topic 3.9, DNA replication and the
genetic code). The particular amino acids in the sequence will influence
how the polypeptide folds to give the protein's final shape. This in
turn determines its function. The only bonds involved in the primary
structure of a protein are peptide bonds.
b=0---I-Z0-b=0---I-
hydrogen
bond
I-
H
Z
Secondary structure - the oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen atoms of
the basic, repeating structure of the amino acids (the variable groups
are not involved at this stage) interact. Hydrogen bonds may form
within the amino acid chain, pulling it into a coil shape called an alpha
helix (Figure 3a).
NCCN
Polypeptide chains can also lie parallel to one another joined by
hydrogen bonds, forming sheet-like structures. The
(b) beta pleated sheet
pattern formed by the individual amino acids causes the
structure to appear pleated, hence the name beta pleated
C-
NYC-C-
NC-
NC-
NC-N
sheet (Figure 3b).
OH OH O HO
C-
NC-
NC-
NON CNC
Secondary structure is the result of hydrogen bonds and
forms at regions along long protein molecules depending
on the amino sequences.
Nell C1
O-
NENE
Tertiary structure - this is the folding of a protein into
OH 0
its final shape. It often includes sections of secondary
structure. The coiling or folding of sections of proteins into their
Figure 3 Depending on the amino
secondary structures brings R-groups of different amino acids closer
acid composition, polypeptides initially
together so they are close enough to interact and further folding of
form either (a) alpha helices or beta
these sections will occur. The following interactions occur between the
(b) pleated sheets-types of secondary
structure
R-groups:
• hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions - weak interactions
between polar and non-polar R-groups
hydrogen bonds - these are weakest of the bonds formed
ionic bonds - these are stronger than hydrogen bonds and form
between oppositely charged R-groups
disulfide bonds (also known as disulfide bridges) -
these are covalent and the strongest of the bonds but only form
between R-groups that contain sulfur atoms.
BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES
arginine serine
| asparagine
leucine
www.
proline
lysine
ACT|GAC
TIGACT
glutamine
threonine
histidine
isoleucine
arginine
start codona
methionine G
10
3rd
T 7 AC
- 2nd - 1st base of codon —
GT
E
LI
leucine
glycine
www
Kphenylalanine)
aspartic
acid
serine
glutamic
acid
LTCAGLIC
stop
www
alanine
O tryoptophan
cysteine
tyrosine
valine
stop
A Figure 4 The DNA code wheel shows how the genetic code is degenerate - different
combinations of bases can code for the same amino acid
Summary questions
1 Explain why DNA replication is described as semi-conservative.
(3 marks)
2 Explain what is meant by the triplet code.
(2 marks)
3 Enzymes are cellular proteins that catalyse reactions - they
have active sites in which specific substrates fit precisely.
Suggest how a genetic mutation may result in an enzyme
becoming non-functional.
(4 marks)
The sequences of bases in specific sections of DNA and the
sequences of amino acids in specific proteins are both used to
compare how closely related different species are. The fewer
differences in the sequences the more closely related the species.
Explain why there are likely to be more differences, overall,
between base sequences of DNA than between amino acid
sequences of proteins.
(3 marks)
3.10 Protein synthesis
Specification reference: 2.1.3
LE
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ transcription and translation
of genes resulting in the
synthesis of polypeptides.
As you learnt in the previous topic, the amino acid sequence of a protein
is coded for by triplets (codons) in the sequence of bases along a strand of
a DNA molecule. A section of DNA that contains the complete sequence
of codons to code for an entire protein is called a gene. In this topic you
will explore how the information in a gene is 'transcribed into RNA
molecules and then 'translated into a specific amino acid sequence.
Synoptic link
Refer back to Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic
cell structure, to refresh your
understanding of how some of
the component structures of a
eukaryotic cell are involved in
protein synthesis.
Transcription
In a eukaryotic cell, DNA is contained within a double membrane
called the nuclear envelope that encloses the nucleus. This protects the
DNA from being damaged in the cytoplasm. Protein synthesis occurs
in the cytoplasm at ribosomes, but a chromosomal DNA molecule is
too large to leave the nucleus to supply the coding information needed
to determine the protein's amino acid sequence.
To get around this problem, the base sequences of genes have to be
copied and transported to the site of protein synthesis, a ribosome.
This process is called transcription and produces shorter molecules
of RNA.
Although transcription results in a different polynucleotide, it has
many similarities with DNA replication. The section of DNA that
contains the gene unwinds and unzips under the control of a DNA
helicase, beginning at a start codon. This involves the breaking of
hydrogen bonds between the bases.
direction of
movement of
RNA polymerase
area of
effect of
RNA
polymerase
nuclear
pore
Only one of the two strands of DNA contains the code for the protein
to be synthesised. This is the sense strand and it runs from 5 to 3'.
The other strand (3' to 5') is a complementary copy of the sense
strand and does not code for a protein. This is the antisense strand
and it acts as the template strand during transcription, so that the
complementary RNA strand formed carries the same base sequence as
the sense strand.
template
strand of
DNA
Free RNA nucleotides will base pair with complementary bases
exposed on the antisense strand when the DNA unzips. As you learnt
in Topic 3.8 Nucleic acids, the thymine base in RNA nucleotides is
replaced with the base uracil (U). So RNA uracil binds to adenine on
the DNA template strand.
nuclear
envelope
Phosphodiester bonds are formed between the RNA nucleotides by the
enzyme RNA polymerase. Transcription stops at the end of the gene
and the completed short strand of RNA is called messenger (m)RNA.
It has the same base sequence as the sequence of bases making up the
gene on the DNA, except that it has uracil in place of thymine.
pre-messenger
RNA leaving nucleus
The mRNA then detaches from the DNA template and leaves the
nucleus through a nuclear pore. The DNA double helix reforms.
Figure 1 Summary of transcription
76
3.6 Structure of proteins
hydrophobic
interaction
This produces a variety of complex-shaped proteins, with
specialised characteristics and functions (Figure 4).
CH
CH2
H3C CH3
HzC CH
CH
polypeptide
backbone
hydrogen
bond
Quaternary structure - this results from the association
of two or more individual proteins called subunits.
The interactions between the subunits are the same as
in the tertiary structure except that they are between
different protein molecules rather than within one
molecule.
C-OH
CH-S-S-CH3
CH2
disulfide bridge
The protein subunits can be identical or different.
Enzymes often consist of two identical subunits whereas
insulin (a hormone) has two different subunits.
Haemoglobin, a protein required for oxygen transport in
the blood, has four subunits, made up of two sets of two
identical subunits (Figure 5).
CH-CH-CH=CH
NHO -C-CH2
ionic bond
Figure 4 The tertiary structures of proteins are very
complex shapes involving multiple types of bonds and
interactions between R-groups
Hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions
Proteins are assembled in the aqueous environment
of the cytoplasm. So the way in which a protein
folds will also depend on whether the R-groups are
hydrophilic or hydrophobic. Hydrophilic groups are on
the outside of the protein while hydrophobic groups
are on the inside of the molecule shielded from the
water in the cytoplasm.
beta chain
beta chain
Breakdown of peptides
As you have learned, peptides are created by amino acids linking
together in condensation reactions to form peptide bonds. Proteases
are enzymes that catalyse the reverse reaction - turning peptides back
into their constituent amino acids. A water molecule is used to break
the peptide bond in a hydrolysis reaction, reforming the amine and
carboxylic acid groups.
alpha chain haem alpha chain
Figure 5 Haemoglobin has a
quaternary structure made up of four
individual proteins (two alpha and
two beta) as well as haem groups
containing iron
Identification of proteins
Biuret test
Peptide bonds form violet coloured complexes with copper ions in alkaline
solutions. This can be used as the basis of a test for proteins.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about enzymes
in Chapter 4, Enzymes.
Remember, when working with chemicals:
Take care, wear safety glasses and report any spillages/breakages to
the teacher.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
haemoglobin in Topic 8.4, Transport
of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
the blood.
A student carried out the following procedure to test a sample for the
presence of protein.
1 3 cm of a liquid sample was mixed with an equal volume of 10% sodium
hydroxide solution.
2 1% copper sulfate solution was then added a few drops at a time until the
sample solution turned blue.
3 The solution was mixed and left to stand for five minutes.
62
