2.4 Eukaryotic cell structure
In organisms with flagella and cilia, centrioles are thought to play a
role in the positioning of these structures.
Flagella and cilia
Both flagella (whip-like) and cilia (hair-like) are extensions that
protrude from some cell types. Flagella are longer than cilia but cilia
are usually present in much greater numbers.
Flagella are used primarily to enable cells motility. In some cells they
are used as a sensory organelle detecting chemical changes in the
cell's environment.
double
plasma microtubule
membrane
A Figure 6 TEM of a cross-section
through a single cilium from a protozoan
(x 70 000 magnification)
Cilia can be mobile or stationary. Stationary cilia are present on the
surface of many cells and have an important function in sensory
organs such as the nose. Mobile cilia beat in a rhythmic manner,
creating a current, and cause fluids or objects adjacent to the cell to
move. For example, they are present in the trachea to move mucus
away from the lungs (helping to keep the air passages clean), and in
fallopian tubes to move egg cells from the ovary to the uterus.
Synoptic link
You will learn about the role of
cilia in Topic 7.2, The mammalian
gaseous exchange system.
Each cilium contains two central microtubules (black circles) surrounded
by nine pairs of microtubules arranged like a "wheel". This is known as
the 9+2 arrangement (Figure 6). Pairs of parallel microtubules slide over
each other causing the cilia to move in a beating motion.
Organelles of protein synthesis
A key function of a cell is to synthesise proteins (including enzymes)
for internal use and for secretion (transport out of the cell). A
significant proportion of the internal structure of a cell is required
for this process. The ribosomes, the endoplasmic reticulum, and the
Golgi apparatus are all closely linked and coordinate the production of
proteins and their preparation for different roles within the cell. The
cytoskeleton plays a key role in coordinating protein synthesis.
Endoplasmic reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a network of membranes
enclosing flattened sacs called cisternae. It is connected to the outer
membrane of the nucleus. There are two types:
Figure 7 Coloured TEM showing the
rough endoplasmic reticulum (folds,
centre). The cell nucleus is partially
seen to the left. The round structures are
vesicles that are being used to transport
proteins from the rough endoplasmic
reticulum to elsewhere in the cell.
Magnification 20 000
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum is responsible for lipid and
carbohydrate synthesis, and storage.
Rough endoplasmic reticulum has ribosomes bound to the
surface and is responsible for the synthesis and transport of
proteins.
Secretory cells, which release hormones or enzymes, have more rough
endoplasmic reticulum than cells that do not release proteins.
Synoptic link
You will learn about proteins in
Topic 3.6, Structure of proteins and
Topic 3.7, Types of proteins. You will
learn about enzymes in Chapter 4,
Enzymes.
Ribosomes
Ribosomes can be free-floating in the cytoplasm or attached to
endoplasmic reticulum, forming rough endoplasmic reticulum. They
are not surrounded by a membrane. They are constructed of RNA
molecules made in the nucleolus of the cell. Ribosomes are the site
of protein synthesis.
30
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
Synoptic link
Lysosomes are specialised forms of vesicles that contain hydrolytic
enzymes. They are responsible for breaking down waste material in
cells, including old organelles. They play an important role in the
immune system as they are responsible for breaking down pathogens
ingested by phagocytic cells. They also play an important role in
programmed cell death or apoptosis.
You will learn about apoptosis in
Topic 19.3, Body plans.
The cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton is present throughout the cytoplasm of all eukaryotic
cells. It is a network of fibres necessary for the shape and stability of a
cell. Organelles are held in place by the cytoskeleton and it controls cell
movement and the movement of organelles within cells.
The cytoskeleton has three components:
Microfilaments - contractile fibres formed from the protein actin.
These are responsible for cell movement and also cell contraction
during cytokinesis, the process in which the cytoplasm of a single
eukaryotic cell is divided to form two daughter cells.
Microtubules – globular tubulin proteins polymerise to form tubes
that are used to form a scaffold-like structure that determines
the shape of a cell. They also act as tracks for the movement of
organelles, including vesicles, around the cell. Spindle fibres,
which have a role in the physical segregation of chromosomes in
cell division, are composed of microtubules.
Intermediate fibres - these fibres give mechanical strength to cells
and help maintain their integrity.
Synoptic link
You will learn about the role of
spindle fibres in cell division in
Chapter 6, Cell division.
Cell movement
The movement of cells like phagocytes depends on the
activity of the actin filaments in the cytoskeleton. The
filament lengths change with the addition and removal of
monomer subunits. The rate at which these subunits are
added is different at each end of a filament. The subunits
are not symmetrical and can only be added if they are in
the correct orientation.
Whether subunits are added or removed, at either end,
is determined by the concentration of subunits in the
cytoplasm. Due to the different rates of addition at either
end, at certain concentrations subunits will be added at
one end and removed at the other. This called treadmilling.
The increasing length of the filaments at one edge of a cell,
the leading edge, leads to cells such as phagocytes moving
in a particular direction.
The subunits have to change shape before they are added
to one end (the minus end) of the filament but not the other
end (the plus end). This means that the subunits are added
at a faster rate at the plus end. The filaments therefore
increase in length at a faster rate in one particular direction.
1 Suggest, giving your reasons, which components
of the cytoskeleton undergo treadmilling and
which components do not.
Centrioles
Centrioles are a component of the cytoskeleton present in most
eukaryotic cells with the exception of flowering plants and most fungi.
They are composed of microtubules. Two associated centrioles form
the centrosome, which is involved in the assembly and organisation of
the spindle fibres during cell division.
29
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
In this topic you will learn about the ultrastructure of eukaryotic cells.
The ultrastructure of a cell is those features that can be seen using an
electron microscope.
Synoptic link
You will learn about the building
blocks of membranes, and
phospholipids in Topic 3.5, Lipids.
The structure and function of cell
membranes and the transport of
substances across membranes
are discussed in Chapter 5, Plasma
membranes.
Compartments for life
Chemical reactions are the fundamental processes of life and in
cells they require both enzymes and specific reaction conditions.
Metabolism involves both the synthesis (building up) and the
breaking down of molecules. Different sets of reactions take place in
different regions of the ultrastructure of the cell.
The reactions take place in the cytoplasm. The cell cytoplasm is
separated from the external environment by a cell-surface membrane.
In eukaryotic cells the cytoplasm is divided into many different
membrane-bound compartments, known as organelles. These
provide distinct environments and therefore conditions for the
different cellular reactions.
Membranes are selectively permeable and control the movement of
substances into and out of the cell and organelles. Membranes are
effective barriers in controlling which substances enter and exit cells
but they are fragile.
There are a number of organelles that are common to all eukaryotic
cells. Each type has a distinct structure and function. They are clearly
seen in animal cells, the focus of this topic. The ultrastucture specific
to plant cells is discussed in the next topic.
A Figure 2 The detail you can see inside a
cell depends on the type of microscope used
to produce the image. This photomicrograph
is of onion cells as seen under a light
microscope. Only the nuclei can be seen
inside the cells (x200 magnification)
microtubule network
cell-surface
membrane
cytosol
vesicles
ribosome
centriole
nucleolus
rough endoplasmic
reticulum
nucleus
smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi apparatus
cytoskeleton
secretory vesicles
mitochondria
A Figure 3 A drawing of a eukaryotic animal cell showing the many other components
that are not visible with a light microscope
2.2 Magnification and calibration
Specification reference: 2.1.1
Magnification, resolution, and the
magnification formula
Magnification is how many times larger the image is than the actual
size of the object being viewed. Interchangeable objective lenses on a
compound light microscope allow a user to adjust the magnification.
Simply magnifying an object does not increase the amount of detail
that can be seen. The resolution also needs to be increased. The
resolution of a microscope determines the amount of detail that can be
seen - the higher the resolution the more details are visible.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ slide preparation and
examination
→ the magnification formula
→ the difference between
magnifcation and resolution.
Resolution is the ability to see individual objects as separate entities.
Imagine a car coming towards you at night with its headlights on.
When it is a long way off you will only see one light but as the car gets
closer you eventually see that there are, in fact, two headlights – they
have been resolved.
Resolution is limited by the diffraction of light as it passes through
samples (and lenses). Diffraction is the tendency of light waves to
spread as they pass close to physical structures such as those present in
the specimens being studied. The structures present in the specimens
are very close to each other and the light reflected from individual
structures can overlap due to diffraction. This means the structures
are no longer seen as separate entities and detail is lost. In optical
microscopy structures that are closer than half the wavelength of light
cannot be seen separately (resolved).
Resolution can be increased by using beams of electrons which
have a wavelength thousands of times shorter than light (Topic 2.3,
More microscopy). Electron beams are still diffracted but the
shorter wavelength means that individual beams can be much
closer before they overlap. This means objects which are much
smaller and closer together can be seen separately without
diffraction blurring the image.
Calculation for magnification
The magnification of an object can be calculated using the
magnification formula:
size of image
magnification = =
actual size of object
size of
image
magnification
actual size
In practice, the size of the image refers to the length of the image
as measured, for example with a ruler. You may need to change
the units of measurement to that of the actual size of the object.
The magnification formula, like all mathematical equations, can be
rearranged to find any of the unknowns, where the remaining values
are known. To help you, you can imagine this three-part formula in a
standard formula triangle (Figure 2).
A Figure 2 Formula triangle for
magnification calculations
2.2 Magnification and calibration
So, if the actual size of the object isn't known but the magnification is
known, the actual size can be calculated by rearranging the formula
to give:
size of image
actual size of object =
magnification
Or, the size of the image can be calculated by rearranging the formula
as below:
actual size of object
size of image =-
magnification
Study tip
When solving magnification
problems, carry out your calculations
with all measurements having the
same units.
Measure the image size in mm
and convert it to the smallest unit
present in the problem, usually
micrometres.
1000 nanometres (nm) =
1 micrometre (um)
1000 micrometres (um) =
1 millimetre (mm)
1000 millimetres (mm) =
1 metre (m)
Magnification itself does not have
units of measurement.
Students should also practice
rearranging the magnification
formula
Worked example: Magnification calculation
Calculate the magnification of the image of the nuclear pore
shown here.
120 nm
To calculate the magnification we first
convert all figures to the smallest unit,
in this case nm.
24 millimetres is equal to
(24 x 1000 x1000) nanometres
or 24000000 nanometres.
size of image
Magnification =
actual size of object
24000000 nm
120 nm
= 2000000 or 2 million times.
Using a graticule to calibrate a light microscope
o
The scale marked on the micrometer slide is usually
100 divisions = 1 mm, so 1 division = 10 um.
To measure the size of a sample under a microscope you
use an eyepiece graticule. The true magnification of the
different lenses of a microscope can vary slightly from
the magnification stated so every microscope, and every
lens, has to be calibrated individually using an eyepiece
graticule and a slide micrometer.
You calibrate the eyepiece graticule scale for each
objective lens separately. Once all three lenses are
calibrated, if you measure the same cell using the
three different lenses you should get the same actual
measurement each time.
For example:
An eyepiece graticule is a glass disc marked with
a fine scale of 1 to 100. The scale has no units and
remains unchanged whichever objective lens is in
place. The relative size of the divisions, however,
increases with each increase in magnification.
You need to know what the divisions represent at
the different magnifications so you can measure
specimens. The scale on the graticule at each
magnification is calibrated using a stage micrometer.
Calibrating a x4 objective lens:
1 Put the stage micrometer in place and the eyepiece
graticule in the eyepiece.
2 Get the scale on the micrometer slide in clear focus.
3 Align the micrometer scale with the scale in the
eyepiece. Take a reading from the two scales - see
next page:
A stage micrometer is a microscope slide with a very
accurate scale in micrometres (um) engraved on it.
16
2.4 Eukaryotic cell structure
Nucleus
The nucleus (plural nuclei) contains coded genetic information
in the form of DNA molecules. DNA directs the synthesis of all
proteins required by the cell (although this protein synthesis
occurs outside of the nucleus at ribosomes). In this way the DNA
controls the metabolic activities of the cell, as many of these
proteins are the enzymes necessary for metabolism to take place.
Not surprisingly, the nucleus is often the biggest single organelle
in the cell (Figure 4).
DNA is contained within a double membrane called a nuclear
envelope to protect it from damage in the cytoplasm. The nuclear
envelope contains nuclear pores (Topic 2.2, Magnification and
calibration) that allow molecules to move into and out of the
nucleus. DNA itself is too large to leave the nucleus to the
site of protein synthesis in the cell cytoplasm. Instead it is
transcribed into smaller RNA molecules, which are exported
via the nuclear pores.
Figure 4 Coloured transmission
electron micrograph of a human cell
showing the nucleus (large oval) and
endoplasmic reticulum. Magnification:
*10000
DNA associates with proteins called histones to form a complex called
chromatin. Chromatin coils and condenses to form structures known
as chromosomes. These only become visible when cells are preparing
to divide.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about DNA, RNA
and protein synthesis in Chapter 3,
Biological molecules.
Nucleolus
The nucleolus is an area within the nucleus and is responsible for
producing ribosomes. It is composed of proteins and RNA. RNA is
used to produce ribosomal RNA (TRNA) which is then combined with
proteins to form the ribosomes necessary for protein synthesis.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about ATP in
Topic 3.11, ATP
inner
outer
membrane membrane
Mitochondria
Mitochondria (singular mitochondrion) are essential organelles
in almost all eukaryotic cells. They are the site of the final stages
of cellular respiration, where the energy stored in the bonds of
complex, organic molecules is made available for the cell to use by the
production of the molecule ATP. The number of mitochondria in a cell
is generally a reflection of the amount of energy it uses, so very active
cells usually have a lot of mitochondria.
matrix
crista
A Figure 5 Electron micrograph and
drawing of a mitochondrion x30000
magnification
Mitochondria have a double membrane. The inner membrane is
highly folded to form structures called cristae and the fluid interior
is called the matrix. The membrane forming the cristae contains the
enzymes used in aerobic respiration. Interestingly, mitochondria also
contain a small amount of DNA, called mitochondrial (mt)DNA.
Mitochondria can produce their own enzymes and reproduce
themselves.
Synoptic link
You will learn about phagocytic
cells in Topic 12.6, The specific
immune system.
Vesicles and lysosomes
Vesicles are membranous sacs that have storage and transport roles.
They consist simply of a single membrane with fluid inside. Vesicles
are used to transport materials inside the cell.
28
2.4 Eukaryotic cell structure
Specification reference: 2.1.1
Microscopes not only make cells visible – they also enable
us to look deep inside individual cells. Using different types
of microscopes you can discover how cells are organised and
investigate the ways in which the structures you can see relate
to their function. Microscopy allows you to see what goes on in a
healthy cell, and to observe some of the changes which take place
if the cell is attacked or diseased.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the ultrastructure and function of
eukaryotic cellular components :
the importance of
the cytoskeleton. The
interrelationship between
the organelles involved in the
production and secretion of
proteins.
Relative sizes of molecules, organelles and cells
The diagram below demonstrates how the development of microscopes
has allowed biologists to discover increasing amounts of detail of cell
ultrastructure. The increased knowledge of structure has led to a better
understanding of cell function.
ribosome
glucose
molecule
double helix
red blood
cell
tennis
ball
protein
width of
human hair
water
bacterium
10mm
0.1mm
1
10 100
nmnmnm
100mm
1000 nm10um
(lum)
100 um
1000um
(1 mm)
1000mm
(1 m)
minimum
minimum
minimum
resolvable
resolvable
resolvable
by electron
by light
by unaided
microscope
microscope
eye
Figure 1 This diagram illustrates the relative sizes of the different components of living organisms
Cells
Synoptic link
The basic unit of all living things is the cell - but not all cells are
the same. There are two fundamental types of cell – prokaryotic
and eukaryotic. Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms with a
simple structure of just a single undivided internal area called the
cytoplasm (composed of cytosol, which is made up of water, salts
and organic molecules). Eukaryotic cells make up multicellular
organisms like animals, plants, and fungi. Eukaryotic cells have a
much more complicated internal structure, containing a membrane-
bound nucleus (nucleoplasm) and cytoplasm, which contains many
membrane-bound cellular components. You will learn more about
the differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells in Topic 2.6.
You will learn about the role of
enzymes in cellular metabolism and
how they are affected by cellular
conditions in Chapter 4, Enzymes.
26
Chapter 2 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 The cytoskeleton is present throughout the
cytoplasm of all eukaryotic cells.
Which of the following statements is/are
correct with respect to the structure of the
cytoskeleton?
Statement 1: Intermediate fibres - these
fibres give mechanical strength to cells and
help maintain their integrity.
Statement 2: Microtubules - contractile
fibres formed from the protein actin.
Responsible for cell movement
Statement 3: Microfilaments - formed from
the cylindrical-shaped protein tubulin. They
form a scaffold-like structure determining the
shape of a cell.
A 1, 2 and 3 are correct
B Only 1 and 2 are correct
C Only 2 and 3 are correct
D Only 1 is correct
(1 mark)
2 Serous cells are present in the salivary glands
of animals. They are responsible for the
production of the enzyme amylase which
begins the breakdown of starch.
(ii) State whether the cell is eukaryotic
or prokaryotic giving the reason for
your decision.
(2 marks)
(i) State which group of enzymes
contains amylase.
(1 mark)
(ii) Outline the stages and organelles
involved in the production and
release of amylase.
(5 marks)
C Explain the process of exocytosis.
(3 marks)
d Discuss the different roles of vesicles,
vacuoles and lysosomes.
(4 marks)
The photo below shows a transmission
electron micrograph of plankton. These
single-celled marine micro-organisms
are thought to be the most abundant
photosynthetic organisms on Earth.
3
honum
08:00 0000
X
Summarparwy nincs array
.
MANN
Calculate the magnification of the
Plankton labelled X. The actual diameter
of the plankton is 2.6 pm. (2 marks)
The amount of detail that can be seen
with a microscope depends on both the
magnification and resolution possible with
the microscope being used. Any increase
in magnification beyond the limit of
resolution results in "empty magnification'.
a
(i) identify the structures labelled in the
diagram.
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(3 marks)
38
2
2.4 Eukaryotic cell structure
Summary questions
1 What is a lysosome and why is the membrane that surrounds
it so important?
(3 marks)
2 Explain why cells need to be compartmentalised, and describe three
examples of compartmentalisation within an animal cell. (4 marks)
3 Compare the structure and function of the rough and smooth
endoplasmic reticulum.
(3 marks)
4 Describe the structure and function of the cytoskeleton. (5 marks)
5 Given the following information about a eukaryotic cell
7 x 10' base pairs of DNA per chromosome 0.34 x 10-ºm per base pair
diploid number is 46
a Calculate the length of DNA in a single cell. Give your answer in metres.
b Suggest how this DNA is packed into a cell only 50 um in diameter.
6 Discuss how the structure of microfilaments and microtubules means
these components of the cytoskeleton are involved in the movement of
cells but the intermediate fibres are not.
(6 marks)
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
Mitochondria and chloroplasts also contain ribosomes, as do
prokaryotic cells.
Golgi apparatus
The Golgi apparatus is similar in structure to the smooth
endoplasmic reticulum. It is a compact structure formed of cisternae
and does not contain ribosomes. It has a role in modifying proteins
and packaging' them into vesicles. These may be secretory vesicles,
if the proteins are destined to leave the cell, or lysosomes, which stay
in the cell.
Protein production
Proteins are synthesised on the ribosomes bound to the endoplasmic
reticulum (1). They then pass into its cisternae and are packaged
into transport vesicles (2). Vesicles containing the newly synthesised
proteins move towards the Golgi apparatus via the transport function
of the cytoskeleton (3). The vesicles fuse with the cis face of the Golgi
apparatus and the proteins enter. The proteins are structurally modified
before leaving the Golgi apparatus in vesicles from its trans face (4).
A Figure 8 Transmission electron
micrograph of a plasma cell with a
large central nucleus surrounded by
large amounts of rough endoplasmic
reticulum. Plasma cells, which are found
in the blood and lymph, produce and
secrete antibodies (which are made of
protein) during an immune response. *
6000 magnification
Secretory vesicles carry proteins that are to be released from the cell.
The vesicles move towards and fuse with the cell-surface membrane,
releasing their contents by exocytosis. Some vesicles form lysosomes -
these contain enzymes for use in the cell (5).
- nuclear pore
cell-surface
membrane
proteins expelled
rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Nucleus
>
Cisternae
secretory vesicle
ribosome
2
cisternae
cis face
A Figure 9 Transmission electron
micrograph of the Golgi apparatus. Golgi
are membrane-bound organelles that
modify and package proteins for onward
transport. 8000 magnification
3
proteins
trans face
transport
vesicles
golgi apparatus
Figure 10 The ribosomes, endoplasmic reticulum, and Golgi apparatus work
together to synthesise, modify and then transport proteins, including enzymes and
hormones, out of the cell
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the
details of protein synthesis at the
ribosome in Topic 3.10, Protein
synthesis.
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
The similarities and differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
The similarities and differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic
cells are summarised in Table 1.
Table 1 Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells compared
Feature
Prokaryotic
Eukaryotic
nucleus
not present
present
DNA
circular
linear
DNA organisation
proteins fold and condense DNA
associated with proteins called histones
only present in certain organelles such as chloroplasts
and mitochondria
extra chromosomal DNA
circular DNA called plasmids
organelles
non membrane-bound
both membrane-bound and non membrane-bound
cell wall
peptidoglycan
chitin in fungi, cellulose in plants, not present in
animals
ribosomes
smaller, 70S
larger, 80S
present
cytoskeleton
reproduction
cell type
cell-surface membrane
binary fission
unicellular
present
present, more complex
asexual or sexual
unicellular and multicellular
present
Prokaryotic cell study
Here is a transmission electron micrograph image of a
slice through a rod-shaped Gram-negative Escherichia
coli bacterium. The cell wall can be seen as a double line
around the cell. The darker area inside is the nucleoid
which contains the DNA. Look closely at the photo and
answer the questions below
1 a Use the micrograph shown here to produce a
scientific drawing of the bacterium.
b Describe the differences you would see if you
were observing a eukaryotic cell with the same
microscope, at the same magnification.
Summary questions
1 List three structural differences between prokaryotic
cells and eukaryotic cells.
(3 marks)
2 Suggest why the lack of membrane-bound organelles
does not stop prokaryotic cells making proteins.
(4 marks)
3 Some antibiotics kill bacteria by disrupting the formation of
peptidoglycan molecules. Explain why these antibiotics kill bacteria
and why they do not have any effect on eukaryotic cells. (4 marks)
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
Summary questions
1 Explain why you would see more detail with an electron
microscope than with a light microscope.
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
2 a Define the term artefact with reference to microscopy.
b Explain why artefacts are more likely to be produced when
preparing samples for electron microscopy than for light
microscopy.
(3 marks)
3 Study the two images below.
a Suggest which form of microscopy was used to produce
each image.
b Explain the reasons for your choices.
c Outline the advantages and disadvantages of each
technique.
(1 mark)
(3 marks)
(6 marks)
4 Confocal microscopy is used in medicine to study the cornea
of the eye and the progression of skin cancer.
a Explain the meaning of the term fluorescence.
b State why lasers are used to provide illumination.
C Explain the purpose of the pinhole aperture in
confocal microscopy.
d One limitation of confocal microscopy is that it can not be
used for deep tissue imaging. Suggest why.
(2 marks)
(1 mark)
(3 marks)
(1 mark)
2.5 The ultrastructure of plant cells
Specification reference: 2.1.1
Plant cells have all of the cellular components you have just seen in
animal cells. However, there are some structures that are only seen in
plant cells, that carry out photosynthesis.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the ultrastructure of
eukaryotic cells (plants) and
the functions of the cellular
components.
Cellulose cell wall
Plant cells, unlike animal cells, are rigid structures. They have a cell
wall surrounding the cell-surface membrane.
Plant cell walls are made of cellulose, a complex carbohydrate. They
are freely permeable so substances can pass into and out of the cell
through the cellulose wall. The cell walls of a plant cell give it shape.
The contents of the cell press against the cell wall making it rigid.
This supports both the individual cell and the plant as a whole. The
cell wall also acts as a defence mechanism, protecting the contents
of the cell against invading pathogens. All plant cells have cellulose
cell walls.
Synoptic link
You will learn about carbohydrates,
including cellulose, in Topic 3.3,
Carbohydrates.
cellulose
cell wall
chloroplasts
starch
granules
cell-surface
membrane
chloroplasts
cytoplasm
nucleus
vacuole
containing
cell wall
nucleus
cell sap
A Figure 1 Left: A transmission electron micrograph of the junction of two leaf cells ~ 18 700 magnification.
Right: A representation of a plant cell as seen under a light microscope
Plant cell organelles
Plant cells, unlike animal cells, are rigid structures. Structures which
are unique to plant cells include:
Vacuoles
Vacuoles are membrane lined sacs in the cytoplasm containing cell
sap. Many plant cells have large permanent vacuoles which are very
important in the maintenance of turgor, so that the contents of the cell
push against the cell wall and maintain a rigid framework for the cell.
The membrane of a vacuole in a plant cell is called the tonoplast. It
is selectively permeable, which means that some small molecules can
pass through it but others cannot. If vacuoles appear in animal cells,
they are small and transient (not permanent).
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
b Define the following terms
(i) resolution
(2 marks)
(ii) magnification
(1 mark)
(iii) Suggest what is meant by the term
'empty magnification (1 mark)
c Outline how a compound light microscope
magnifies an image of a specimen.
(4 marks)
d Describe three different ways of preparing
microscope slides for light microscopy.
(6 marks)
a Explain the meaning of the term artefact
with reference to microscopy. (2 marks)
b Discuss the advantages and disadvantages
of using an electron microscope to study
the ultrastructure of cells. (4 marks)
Outline how laser scanning confocal
microscopes produce an image. (4 marks)
a Complete and complete the table below.
The first row has been done for you.
(5 marks)
4
5
Feature
Prokaryotic
Eukaryotic
linear
DNA
circular
Extra
chromosomal
DNA
only present
in certain
organelles such as
chloroplasts and
mitochondria
Organelles
non membrane
bound
Cell wall
peptidoglycan
large, 80 s
Ribosomes
Cell surface
membrane
present
b Define the term 'cell ultrastructure'.
(2 marks)
Human genomes contain many more
genes than bacterial genomes, and they are
much longer.
Discuss the way in which this affects
the packing of DNA in eukaryotes and
prokaryotes.
(6 marks)
2.5 The ultrastructure of plant cells
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the role
of chloroplasts in photosynthesis
in Chapter 17, Energy for biological
processes.
Chloroplasts
Chloroplasts are the organelles responsible for photosynthesis in
plant cells. They are found in the cells in the green parts of plants such
as the leaves and the stems but not in the roots. They have a double
membrane structure, similar to mitochondria. The fluid enclosed
in the chloroplast is called the stroma. They also have an internal
network of membranes, which form flattened sacs called thylakoids.
Several thylakoids stacked together are called a granum (plural
grana). The grana are joined by membranes called lamellae. The grana
contain the chlorophyll pigments, where light-dependent reactions
occur during photosynthesis. Starch produced by photosynthesis is
present as starch grains. Like mitochondria, chloroplasts also contain
DNA and ribosomes. Chloroplasts are therefore able to make their
own proteins.
The internal membranes provide the large surface area needed for
the enzymes, proteins and pigment molecules necessary in the process
of photosynthesis.
Summary questions
1 Using your knowledge of cell ultrastructure, identify the structures
visible in the micrograph below. State, with reasons, whether
the cell is a plant or animal cell
(4 marks)
starch grain
stroma
double
membrane
thylakoid
Figure 2 Transmission electron
micrograph (top) and drawing of
chloroplasts seen in the leaf of a pea
plant (bottom). The chloroplasts are
seen cut lengthways so the grana
are visible. Starch produced during
photosynthesis is seen as dark circles
(starch grains) within each chloroplast.
*13 000 magnification
2 a Many different organisms have cell walls including fungi and
bacteria. What is unique about plant cell walls?
(1 mark)
b Give three functions of plant cell walls
(3 marks)
3 Describe the similarities and differences between a human
cell and a plant root cell
(3 marks)
34
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
is gained and as knowledge increases. Theories are
proposed, accepted and can then be later disproved as
new evidence comes to light. New evidence can arise in a
number of ways, including as technology develops. This
is the case with cell theory - as microscopes with higher
magnification and resolution were developed, cells could
be observed for the first time. Table 1 summarises some
of the developments in cell theory.
Table 1 Cell theory timeline
Timeline
Development of cell theory
1665
Cell first observed
Robert Hooke, an English scientist, observed the structure of thinly sliced cork using an early light
microscope. He described the compartments he saw as 'cells' - coining the term we still use today.
As this was dead plant tissue he was observing only cell walls.
1674-1683
First living cells observed
Anton van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch biologist, developed a technique for creating powerful glass lenses and
used his handcrafted microscopes to examine samples of pond water. He was the first person to observe
bacteria and protoctista and described them as 'little animals' or 'animalcules' - today we call them
microorganisms. He went on to observe red blood cells, sperm cells, and muscle fibres for the first time.
Evidence for the origin of new plant cells
1832
Barthélemy Dumortier, a Belgian botanist, was the first to observe cell division in plants providing
evidence against the theories of the time, that new cells arise from within old cells or that cells
formed spontaneously from non-cellular material. However it was several more years until cell
division as the origin of all new cells became the accepted theory.
Nucleus first observed
1833
Robert Brown, an English botanist, was the first to describe the nucleus of a plant cell.
1837-1838
The birth of a universal cell theory
Matthias Schleiden, a German botanist, proposed that all plant tissues are composed of cells. Jan
Purkyně, a Czech scientist, was the first to use a microtome to make ultra-thin slices of tissue
for microscopic examination. Based on his observations, he proposed that not only are animals
composed of cells but also that the basic cellular tissue is clearly analogous to that of plants".
Not long after this, and independently, Theodor Schwann, a German physiologist, made a similar
observation and declared that "all living things are composed of cells and cell products". He is the
scientist credited with the 'birth' of cell theory.
1844 (1855)
Evidence for the origin of new animal cells
Robert Remak, a Polish/German biologist, was the first to observe cell division in animal cells, disproving
the existing theory that new cells originate from within old cells. He was not believed at the time however,
and Rudolf Virchow, a German biologist, published these findings as his own a decade later in 1855.
1860
Spontaneous generation disproved
Louis Pasteur disproved the theory of spontaneous generation of cells by demonstrating that
bacteria would only grow in a sterile nutrient broth after it had been exposed to the air.
1 Outline the importance of microscopes in the study of living organisms.
2 Suggest, with reasons, why cell theory was not fully developed before
the mid-19th century.
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
Atomic force microscopy
detector
The atomic force microscope (AFM) gathers information
about a specimen by 'feeling' its surface with a mechanical
probe. These are scanning microscopes that generate
three-dimensional images of surfaces.
laser beam
cantilever
An AFM consists of a sharp tip (probe) on a cantilever
(a lever supported at one end) that is used to scan the
surface of a specimen. When this is brought very close
to a surface, forces between the tip and the specimen
cause deflections of the cantilever. These deflections are
measured using a laser beam reflected from the top of
the cantilever into a detector.
line scan
tip atoms
Fixation and staining are not required and specimens
can be viewed in almost normal cell conditions
without the damage caused during the preparation of
specimens for electron microscopy. Living systems
can even be examined.
force
The resolution of AFM is very high, in the order of 0.1 nm.
Information can be gained at the atomic level, even about
the bonds within molecules.
ooooo
surface atoms of specimen
The pharmaceutical industry in particular uses AFM
to identify potential drug targets on cellular proteins
and DNA. These microscopes can lead to a better
understanding of how drugs interact with their target
molecule or cell.
AFM is also being employed to identify new drugs.
Finding and identifying new chemical compounds from
the natural world, which may have medical applications,
takes a long time, and is expensive. The molecular
structures need to be understood before their potential
use in medicine is known. Atomic force microscopes can
speed up this process, saving money and, potentially,
lives. The case study below is a good example of the
importance of AFM.
A Figure 5 Top: The principle of atomic force microscopy.
Bottom: A nuclear pore as shown by atomic force microscopy
the molecular structure, the way in which the
atoms were joined together, was not so easy to
work out and would have taken months using
conventional techniques.
Case Study: Deep sea molecules
In 2010, scientists working on a species of bacterium
from a mud sample taken from the Mariana Trench-
the deepest place on the planet located nearly
11000 metres beneath the Pacific Ocean, found
that the bacteria produced an unknown chemical
compound
Using atomic force microscopy the scientists were
able to image the molecules at very high, atomic level
resolution within one week, giving them the molecular
structure they needed.
This was the first time this method had been used in
this way. This new approach could lead to much faster
identification of unknown compounds and ultimately
speed up the process of the development of new
medicines.
The chemical composition (the number and type of
atoms present) was easily determined. However,
23
2.3 More microscopy
Figure 6 Atomic force
microscopy unveiled
the previously unknown
structure of cephalandole A,
a chemical compound
that could lead to the
development of new drugs
1 Explain why atomic force microscopy has a greater
resolution than traditional light microscopy.
2 AFM is capable of producing magnifications equal
or better than electron microscopes (this is
demonstrated in Figure 7). Explain why.
3 Discuss why, despite the comparable
magnification, atomic force microscopy could not
have resulted in the same advances in the study
of cell function as electron microscopy.
Figure 7 Atomic force microscopy image of
Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, commonly known for
causing MRSA infections
T
Super resolved fluorescence microscopy
that produced normally in light microscopy. In this way,
individual strands of DNA become visible.
Electron microscopes cannot be used to examine living
cells and it was always believed that the maximum
resolution for light microscopes was 0.2 pm, about half
the wavelength of light. This limits the detail that can be
seen in living cells. In 2014 Eric Betzig, Stefan W. Hell,
and William E. Moerner were awarded the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry for achieving resolutions greater than 0.2 um
using light microscopy.
Eric Betzig and William E. Moerner independently
developed the second principle which relies on the ability
to control the fluorescence of individual molecules.
Specimens are scanned multiple times but each time
different molecules are allowed to fluoresce. The images
are then superimposed and the resolution of the combined
image is at the molecular level, much greater than 0.2 um.
LS
Two principles were involved, both forms of super
resolution fluorescent microscopy (SRFM). One
involved building up a very high resolution image by
combining many very small images. The other involved
superimposing many images with normal resolution to
create one very high resolution image.
It is now possible to follow individual molecules during
cellular processes. Proteins involved in Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's diseases can be observed interacting and
fertilised eggs dividing into embryos can be studied at
a molecular level.
1 a
Stefan Hell developed stimulated emission depletion
(STED) which involves the use of two lasers which are
slightly offset. The first laser scans a specimen causing
fluorescence, followed by the second laser which negates
the fluorescence from all but a molecular sized area.
A picture is built up with a resolution much greater than
b
Explain why electron microscopes cannot be
used to examine living cells.
Describe how the ability to control the
fluorescence of individual molecules helped
uncover cell processes.
24
2.1 Microscopy
A Figure 1 Drawing of cork from 1663 seen under
an early microscope. Robert Hooke described the
Figure 2 Robert Hooke's drawing of his own compound microscope, which
pores as cells, thus coining the term. He prepared
he used to see the 'cells'in a sample of cork
the specimen by making thin slices with a razor
blade, inventing the technique of sectioning
How a light microscope works
Study tip
A compound light microscope has two lenses – the objective
lens, which is placed near to the specimen, and an eyepiece lens,
References to clarity or clearness
through which the specimen is viewed. The objective lens produces
of images are not relevant when
a magnified image, which is magnified again by the eyepiece lens.
discussing microscopy. It is
This objective/eyepiece lens configuration allows for much higher
important to explain that objects
magnification and reduced chromatic aberration than that in a simple
have become visibly distinct with
light microscope.
increased resolution, in other
words more detail can be seen.
Illumination is usually provided by a light underneath the sample.
Opaque specimens can be illuminated from above with some
microscopes.
image viewed here
eyepiece lens
coarse-focusing
knob
fine-focusing
knob
turret -
objective lens -
specimen
stage
light from mirror
or light bulb
Figure 3 A compound light microscope
10
2
2.3 More microscopy
Light emitted from other parts of the specimen would reduce the
resolution and cause blurring. This unwanted radiation does not pass
through the pinhole and is not detected. A laser is used instead of light
to get higher intensities, which improves the illumination.
As very thin sections of specimen are examined and light from
elsewhere is removed, very high resolution images can be obtained.
The spot illuminating the specimen is moved across the specimen and
a two dimensional image is produced. A three dimensional image can
be produced by creating images at different focal planes.
Laser scanning confocal microscopy is non-invasive and is currently
used in the diagnosis of diseases of the eye and is also being developed
for use in endoscopic procedures. The fact that it can be used to see
the distribution of molecules within cells means it is also used in the
development of new drugs.
The future uses for advanced optical microscopy include virtual biopsies,
particularly in cases of suspected skin cancer.
The beamsplitter is a dichroic mirror, which only reflects one wavelength
(from the laser) but allows other wavelengths (produced by the sample)
to pass through
The positions of the two pinholes means the light waves from the laser
(illuminating the sample) follow the same path as the light waves
radiated when the sample fluoresces. This means they will both have
the same focal plane, hence the term confocal.
COD Fluorescent tags
Synoptic link
You will learn more about
antibodies in Topic 12.6, The
specific immune system.
By using antibodies with fluorescent 'tags',
specific features can be targeted and
therefore studied by confocal microscopy
with much more precision than when using
staining and light microscopy.
Synoptic link
You will learn about genetic
engineering in Topic 21.4, Genetic
engineering.
Green fluorescent protein (GFP) is
produced by the jellyfish Aequorea
victoria. The protein emits bright green light when illuminated by ultraviolet
light. GFP molecules have been engineered to fluoresce different colours,
meaning different components of a specimen can be studied at the same
time. The gene for this protein has been isolated and can be attached, by
genetic engineering, to genes coding for proteins under investigation. The
fluorescence indicates that a protein is being made and is used to see
where it goes within the cell or organism. Bacterial, fungal, plant, and human
cells have all been modified to express this gene and fluoresce. The use of
these fluorescing proteins provides a non-invasive technique to study the
production and distribution of proteins in cells and organisms.
a Define the term resolution with reference to microscopy.
b Suggest whether fluorescent microscopy has a higher resolution
than normal light microscopy. Explain your answer.
BASIC COMPONENTS OF
LIVING SYSTEMS
2.1 Microscopy
Specification reference: 2.1.1
Before the invention of microscopes, we knew nothing of bacteria,
cells, sperm, pollen grains, chromosomes - the list is endless.
Microscopes have given us the power to understand disease, see how a
new life is formed, watch the dance of the chromosomes as cells divide,
and manipulate the processes of life itself.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the use of light microscopy
the preparation of microscope
slides for use in light
microscopy
the use of staining in light
microscopy
the representation of cell
structure seen under light
microscope using scientific
annotated drawings.
Seeing is believing
A microscope is an instrument which enables you to magnify an object
hundreds, thousands and even hundreds of thousands of times. We can
see many large organisms with the naked eye, but microscopes open up
a whole world of unicellular organisms. By making visible the individual
cells which make up multicellular organisms, microscopes allow us to
discover how details of their structures relate to their functions.
###
##
The first types of microscopes to be developed were light microscopes
in the 16th to 17th century. Since then they have continued to be
developed and improved.
By the mid-19th century, scientists, for the first time, had access to
microscopes with a high enough level of magnification to allow them
to see individual cells. Cell theory was developed. It states that:
both plant and animal tissue is composed of cells
cells are the basic unit of all life
cells only develop from existing cells.
Light microscopy continues to be important - it is easily available,
relatively cheap and can be used out in the field, and it can be used to
observe living organisms as well as dead, prepared specimens.
History of the light microscope and the development of cell theory o
Late in the Roman Empire the Romans began to develop who invented the telescope when experimenting with
and experiment with glass. They noted how objects looked multiple glass lenses in a tube in the late 15th century.
bigger when viewed through pieces of glass that were Others claim it was Galileo Galilei in 1609 who developed
thicker in the middle than at the edges.
the first true or compound microscope (Table 1).
There was little further development of glass lenses until
Galileo's instrument was the first to be given the name
'microscope'.
around the 13th century and the invention of spectacles or
eye glasses.
Cell theory
The credit for the invention of the light microscope is much The development of cell theory is a good example of how
disputed. Some accredit it to two Dutch spectacle makers scientific theories change over time as new evidence
2.6 Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
filament
hook
basal body
cell wall
Flagella
The flagella of prokaryotes is thinner than
the equivalent structure of eukaryotes and
does not have the 9+2 arrangement. The
energy to rotate the filament that forms
the flagellum is supplied from the process
of chemiosmosis, not from ATP as in
eukaryotic cells.
The flagellum is attached to the cell
membrane of a bacterium by a basal body
and rotated by a molecular motor.
peptidoglycan
- plasma
membrane
cytoplasm
Figure 1 A prokaryotic flagellum
The basal body attaches the filament comprising the flagellum
to the cell-surface membrane of a bacterium. A molecular
motor causes the hook to rotate giving the filament a whip like
movement, which propels the cell.
- Pili
cell wall
cell-surface
membrane
cytoplasm
ribosome (705)
free chromosomal
DNA (nucleoid region)
flagellum
size 0.1-10 um
A comparison with eukaryotic cells
The first eukaryotic cells appeared about 1.5 billion years
ago. As you have learned eukaryotic cells are much more
complex than prokaryotic cells. Their DNA is present
within a nucleus and exists as multiple chromosomes,
which are supercoiled, and each one wraps around a
number of proteins called histones, forming a complex
for efficient packaging. This complex is called chromatin
and chromatin coils and condenses to form chromosomes.
Eukaryotic genes are generally switched on and off
individually.
As you learnt earlier, eukaryotic cells have membrane-
bound organelles including mitochondria and chloroplasts
(Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic cell structure and Topic 2.4, The
ultrastructure of plant cells).
mitochondrion
nucleous
nucleus
cell-surface
membrane
cytoplasm
ribosome (80s)
centrosome(s)
rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
cytoskeleton
Organisms from the plant, animal, fungi, and protoctista
kingdoms are all composed of eukaryotic cells. Many
are multicellular.
Golgi
- apparatus
size 10-100 um
Figure 2 Top: Features of prokaryotic cell
(bacterium). Bottom: features of a typical
eukaryotic cell (animal). Common features are
highlighted in bold
1 Endosymbiosis
The theory of endosymbiosis is that mitochondria and chloroplasts,
and possibly other eukaryotic organelles, were formerly free-living
bacteria, that is, prokaryotes. The theory is that these prokaryotes
were taken inside another cell as an endosymbiont - an organism
that lives within the body or cells of another organism. This
eventually led to the evolution of eukaryotic cells.
1 Discuss, using information from this topic, any evidence that
supports the endosymbiotic theory.
36
2.6 Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
Specification reference: 2.1.1
Animals, plants, and fungi are all complex multicellular organisms.
The cells making up these organisms are eukaryotic. There is a lot of
evidence that suggests that eukaryotic cells evolved from less complex
prokaryotic cells. These prokaryotic cells, present in great numbers,
live in an incredibly diverse range of habitats. These unicellular
organisms can be classed into two evolutionary domains - Archaea
and Bacteria, which evolved from an ancient common ancestor.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the structure and
ultrastructure of prokaryotic
cells and eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic cells
Prokaryotic cells may have been among the earliest forms of life on
Earth. They first appeared around 3.5 billion years ago when the
surface of the Earth was a very hostile environment. Scientists believe
that these early cells were adapted to living in extremes of salinity,
pH and temperature.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the
classification of prokaryotes into
the domains Archaea and Bacteria
in Topic 10.2, The five kingdoms.
These organisms are known as extremophiles and they still exist today.
They can be found in hydrothermal vents and salt lakes - similar
environments to those believed to have made up the early Earth. They
are usually of the domain Archaea and more recently they have been
found in more hospitable environments such as soil and the human
digestive system.
Prokaryotic organisms are always unicellular with a relatively simple
structure. Their DNA is not contained within a nucleus, they have few
organelles and the organelles they do have are not membrane-bound.
DNA
The structure of the DNA contained within prokaryotes is
fundamentally the same as in eukaryotes but it is packaged differently.
Prokaryotes generally only have one molecule of DNA, a chromosome,
which is supercoiled to make it more compact. The genes on the
chromosome are often grouped into operons, meaning a number of
genes are switched on or off at the same time.
Ribosomes
The ribosomes in prokaryotic cells are smaller than those in
eukaryotic cells. Their relative size is determined by the rate at which
they settle, or form a sediment, in solution. The larger eukaryotic
ribosomes are designated 80s and the smaller prokaryotic ribosomes,
70S. They are both necessary for protein synthesis, although the
larger 80S ribosomes are involved in the formation of more complex
proteins.
Cell wall
Prokaryotic cells have a cell wall made from peptidoglycan, also
known as murein. It is a complex polymer formed from amino acids
and sugars.
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
the ultrastructure of cells are inevitable during the processing that
the samples must undergo. They are seen as the loss of continuity
in membranes, distortion of organelles and empty spaces in the
cytoplasm of cells
Experience enables scientists to distinguish between an artefact and a
true structure.
Identifying artefacts 0
that some species of bacteria do have mesosomes as part of
their normal structure, but this is not the general consensus.
Identifying artefacts in microscopy preparation can
cause much discussion and controversy. 'Mesosome'
was the name given to invaginations (inward foldings)
of cell membranes that were observed using electron
microscopes after bacterial specimens had been
chemically fixed. They were thought to be a normal
structure, or organelle, found within prokaryotes. The large
surface area of the folded membrane was considered
to be an important site for the process of oxidative
phosphorylation. However, when specimens were fixed
by the more recently developed, non-chemical technique
called cryofixation, the mesosomes were no longer visible.
This is a good example of how the scientific community
accepted an idea based on the evidence available at the
time and as techniques improved and more evidence
became available, the collective knowledge and
understanding developed and changed. New evidence can
either provide further support for a theory or disprove an
earlier theory. Scientific knowledge is constantly developing.
1
It is now widely thought that the majority of mesosomes
observed are actually artefacts produced by the chemicals
used in the fixation process in electron microscopy
preparation, which damage bacterial cell membranes.
However, there are still a number of scientists who believe
Structures that look similar to mesosomes have
recently been observed in bacteria after treatment
with certain types of antibiotics.
Suggest, with reasons, whether this information
is evidence to support the current theory that
mesosomes are artefacts or the theory that they
are, in fact, organelles.
detector
Laser scanning confocal microscopy
Light microscopy has also continued to develop. Some
of the latest technology produces images that are very
different from electron micrographs but are just as useful.
confocal pinhole
illumination
pinhole
dichroic
mirror
laser
Conventional optical microscopes use visible light to
illuminate specimens and a lens to produce a magnified
image. In fluorescent microscopes a higher light intensity
is used to illuminate a specimen that has been treated
with a fluorescent chemical (a fluorescent 'dye').
Fluorescence is the absorption and re-radiation of light.
Light of a longer wavelength and lower energy is emitted
and used to produce a magnified image.
objective
lens
- excitation light
--- out of focus light
in focus emission
light
– focal plane
A laser scanning confocal microscope moves a
single spot of focused light across a specimen
specimen
(point illumination). This causes
fluorescence from the components labelled focus 1
with a 'dye'. The emitted light from the specimen
is filtered through a pinhole aperture. Only light radiated from
very close to the focal plane (the distance that gives the sharpest
focus) is detected (Figure 4).
A Figure 4 The light rays from the laser and
the fluorescing sample follow the same path
and have the same focal plane
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
30 divisions on the eyepiece graticule = 10 divisions on
the stage micrometer
Use these readings to calculate the calibration factor for
the x4 objective lens.
100 micrometer divisions = 1 mm
So each small division is 1/100 mm = 0.01 mm or
10.0 um
1110 120 130 140 150 160
l
3 The student replaced the micrometer slide with pollen
sample slides and used the calibrated scale in the
eyepiece to measure the diameter of the pollen grains.
.
www
30 gráticule divisions = 10 micrometer divisions
10 micrometer divisions = 10 x 10 = 100 um
number of eyepiece divisions
1 graticule division = -
number of micrometres
30 graticule divisions = 100 um so 1 graticule division =
100/30=3.33 pm
The magnification factor is 3.33
To use this magnification factor remove the stage
micrometer and place a prepared slide on the stage.
Measure the size of an object in graticule units. To find
the actual size multiply the number of graticule units
measured by the magnification factor to give you the
length in um
graticule divisions x magnification factor = measurement
(um)
ANA
10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
e.g., the diameter of a cell seen using the x4 objective
lens measures 10 graticule divisions. Each graticule
division = 3.33 um so the cell diameter = 10 x 3.33 =
33.3um.
eyepiece graticule scale
10
Results
The student decided to use the 10 objective lens.
0
20
Result
Diameter of pollen grain/divisions
11
16
||||||||||||
0 2 4 6 8 10
stage micrometer scale: 1 division = 10um
Calibration example
A student was asked to calibrate the x 10 lens of a light
microscope and then to determine the diameter of a
pollen grain from a sample slide provided.
1 State the correct names of the scale used on
the stage of the microscope and the scale in the
eyepiece.
2 Calculate the calibration factor of the 10
objective lens.
3 a Fill in the missing reading in the table for the
pollen grain shown in the artwork above.
b Using the table calculate the diameter of the
different pollen grains using the calibration
factor you have calculated in question 2.
Calculate the mean diameter of the pollen grains.
d Suggest why it is important to calibrate
the lens that is going to be used to view the
pollen grains.
1 The student placed a scale on the stage of the
microscope and focused on it with the x10 lens.
100 small divisions of the scale are 1 mm long, so 1
division is 10 pm.
2 The student then aligned the scale in the eyepiece
with the scale on the microscope stage and calibrated
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
Sample preparation o
There are a number of different ways in which samples
and specimens can be prepared for examination by light
microscopy. The method chosen will depend on the nature
of the specimen and the resolution that is desired.
• Dry mount - Solid specimens are viewed whole or cut
into very thin slices with a sharp blade, this is called
sectioning. The specimen is placed on the centre of
the slide and a cover slip is placed over the sample.
For example hair, pollen, dust and insect parts can be
viewed whole in this way, and muscle tissue or plants
can be sectioned and viewed in this way.
Squash slides - Awet mount is first prepared, then
a lens tissue is used to gently press down the cover
slip. Depending on the material, potential damage to
a cover slip can be avoided by squashing the sample
between two microscope slides. Using squash slides
is a good technique for soft samples. Care needs to
be taken that the cover slip is not broken when being
pressed. For example, root tip squashes are used to
look at cell division.
Smear slides – The edge of a slide is used to smear
the sample, creating a thin, even coating on another
slide. A cover slip is then placed over the sample. An
example of a smear slide is a sample of blood. This is a
good way to view the cells in the blood.
cover slip
hair
drop of blood
450
slide
Wet mount -Specimens are suspended in a liquid
such as water or an immersion oil. A cover slip is
placed on from an angle, as shown. For example,
aquatic samples and other living organisms can be
viewed this way.
1
cover slip
droplet
Suggest reasons for the following, with reference to
slide preparation:
a Specimens must be thin.
b When preparing a wet mount the refractive
index (ability to bend light) of the medium
should be roughly the same as glass.
C A cover slip must be placed onto a wet mount at
an angle.
slide
Using staining oo
In basic light microscopy the sample is illuminated
from below with white light and observed from above
(brightfield microscopy). The whole sample is illuminated
at once (wide-field microscopy). The images tend to
have low contrast as most cells do not absorb a lot of
light. Resolution is limited by the wavelength of light
and diffraction of light as it passes through the sample.
Diffraction is the bending of light as it passes close to the
edge of an object.
The cytosol (aqueous interior) of cells and other cell
structures are often transparent. Stains increase contrast as
different components within a cell take up stains to different
degrees. The increase in contrast allows components to
become visible so they can be identified (Figure 4).
To prepare a sample for staining it is first placed on a slide
and allowed to air dry. This is then heat-fixed by passing
through a flame. The specimen will adhere to the microscope
slide and will then take up stains.
2.1 Microscopy
red blood cell
(erythrocyte)
white blood cell
(leucocyte)
Figure 4 Light micrograph and annotated diagram of a blood sample that has been stained using Wright's
stain (a mixture of eosin red and methylene blue dyes). The nuclei of the white blood cells are stained purple
Crystal violet or methylene blue are positively charged
dyes, which are attracted to negatively charged materials
in cytoplasm leading to staining of cell components.
Dyes such as nigrosin or Congo red are negatively charged
and are repelled by the negatively charged cytosol. These
dyes stay outside cells, leaving the cells unstained, which
then stand out against the stained background. This is a
negative stain technique.
Differential staining can distinguish between two types
of organisms that would otherwise be hard to identify. It
can also differentiate between different organelles of a
single organism within a tissue sample.
A Figure 5 Gram stain of Streptococcus pneumoniae, a
Gram-positive bacteria which cause pneumonia (x200
magnification). Gram-positive bacteria retain a crystal violet
dye during the Gram stain process and appear blue or violet
under a microscope
Gram stain technique is used to separate bacteria into
two groups, Gram-positive bacteria and Gram-negative
bacteria (Figure 5). Crystal violet is first applied to a
bacterial specimen on a slide, then iodine, which fixes
the dye. The slide is then washed with alcohol. The
Gram-positive bacteria retain the crystal violet stain and
will appear blue or purple under a microscope. Gram-
negative bacteria have thinner cell walls and therefore
lose the stain. They are then stained with safranin dye,
which is called a counterstain. These bacteria will then
appear red. Gram-positive bacteria are susceptible to
the antibiotic penicillin, which inhibits the formation of
cell walls. Gram-negative bacteria have much thinner
cell walls that are not susceptible to penicillin.
Acid-fast technique is used to differentiate species
of Mycobacterium from other bacteria. A lipid solvent
is used to carry carbolfuchsin dye into the cells being
studied. The cells are then washed with a dilute acid-
alcohol solution. Mycobacterium are not affected by
the acid-alcohol and retain the carbolfuchsin stain,
Figure 6 Yersinia pestis, the Gram-negative bacteria which
cause the bubonic plague infecting humans and animals
(x1450 magnification). Gram-negative bacteria appear red or
pink under a microscope
12
2
2.2 Magnification and calibration
Summary questions
1 Suggest why you should put all measurements into the
same units before carrying out calculations.
(2 marks)
2 Calculate how many nanometres are present in 3846 centimetres.
Give your answer in standard form.
3 Explain the difference between contrast and resolution. (2 marks)
4 Calculate the magnification of the micrograph showing human
cheek cells (Figure 3).
A Figure 3 Light micrograph of squamous
epithelium cells from the inside of a human cheek
The average diameter of a cheek cell is 60 um.
(2 marks)
5 Explain how diffraction limits resolution.
(5 marks)
(2 marks)
6 Explain why eyepiece graticules do not have units.
2
2.1 Microscopy
The light micrograph (Figure 7) shows a layer of onion cells as seen under a
light microscope. Next to the micrograph is an example of a good scientific
drawing of this image.
cell wall
cytoplasm
nucleus
x 18 magnification
Figure 7 Top: Light micrograph of a layer of onion cuticle, showing the
bands of large, rectangular cells. The dark spot in the centre of each cell is its
nucleus. x 18 magnification. Bottom: A scientific drawing from the micrograph
Below is an example of a poor scientific drawing:
nucleus
cytoplasm
cell wall
1 Describe how this diagram is incorrect as a scientific drawing.
Summary questions
1 Outline the basic concepts of cell theory. (3 marks) 4 a Calculate the low and high power magnifications of
a microscope with the following lenses:
2 Explain why staining is used in microscopy. (2 marks)
i Eyepiece lens x 10
3 Compound microscopes led to new discoveries
ii Objective lenses x 10 and 40. (2 marks)
essential for cell theory to be fully explained.
b You are observing a specimen of squamous tissue
Explain the benefit of having two lenses in
under high power. The individual cells have an
a microscope.
(4 marks) average diameter of 60 pm and the diameter of the
field of view of the objective lens is 2 mm. Calculate
the maximum number of whole cells that are visible
in the field of view.
(3 marks)
14
2
2.3 More microscopy
Table 1 summarises the differences between light and electron microscopy.
Table 1 A comparison of light and electron microscopy
Light microscope
Electron microscope
inexpensive to buy and operate
expensive to buy and operate
small and portable
large and needs to be installed
complex sample preparation
sample preparation often distorts material
simple sample preparation
sample preparation does not
usually lead to distortion
vacuum is not required
vacuum is required
natural colour of sample is seen
(or stains are used)
black and white images produced (but can
be coloured digitally)
over 500 000 magnification
up to 2000 magnification
resolving power is 200 nm
resolving power of transmission electron
microscope is 0.5 nm and a scanning
electron microscope is 3-10 nm
specimens can be living or dead
specimens are dead
Scientific drawings from electron micrographs 2
Electron microscopes produce
images with much greater resolution
starch
than light microscopes and therefore
--chloroplasts
granules
much more detail can be seen.
starch
granules
chloroplasts
nucleus
Producing good scientific drawings
from electron micrographs takes
cell wall -
practice. The same rules used in
producing drawings from light
micrographs must still be observed (Topic 2.1, Microscopy).
cell wall
nucleus
Figure 3 Transmission electron
micrograph of a section through two leaf
cells at their junction. Their cell walls run
from top centre to lower left. A nucleus is
seen at lower right. Starch granules
(pale ovals) can be seen in the chloroplast
(dark grey, upper left and right). 18 700
magnification
1
Study the two drawings above and state, with
reasons, which of them represents the best
scientific drawing
Creation of artefacts
An artefact is a visible structural detail caused by processing the
specimen and not a feature of the specimen. Artefacts appear in both
light and electron microscopy. The bubbles that get trapped under
the cover slip as you prepare a slide for light microscopy are artefacts.
When preparing specimens for electron microscopy, changes in
20
2.3 More microscopy
Specification reference: 2.1.1
Light microscopy started the science of cell biology, but it has limitations.
In the middle of the 20th century a new invention, the electron
microscope, revolutionised the study of cells and enabled biologists to see
deep inside structures that were invisible under a light microscope.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the use of laser scanning
confocal microscopy
→ the use of electron microscopy.
Electron microscopy
In light microscopy, increased magnification can be achieved easily
using the appropriate lenses, but if the image is blurred no more
detail will be seen. Resolution is the limiting factor.
In electron microscopy, a beam of electrons with a wavelength
of less than lnm is used to illuminate the specimen. More detail
of cell ultrastructure can be seen because electrons have a much
smaller wavelength than light waves. They can produce images with
magnifications of up to 500 000 and still have clear resolution.
Electron microscopes have changed the way we understand cells
but there are some disadvantages to this technique. They are very
expensive pieces of equipment and can only be used inside a carefully
controlled environment in a dedicated space. Specimens can also be
damaged by the electron beam and because the preparation process
is very complex, there is a problem with artefacts (structures that
are produced due to the preparation process). However, as techniques
improve a lot of theses artefacts can be eliminated.
A Figure 1 Coloured transmission
electron micrograph of a lymphocyte
(white blood cell). Magnification x1600
There are two types of electron microscope:
• In a transmission electron microscope (TEM) a beam of
electrons is transmitted through a specimen and focused to
produce an image. This is similar to light microscopy. This has the
best resolution with a resolving power of 0.5 nm (Figure 1).
In a scanning electron microscope (SEM) a beam of electrons
is sent across the surface of a specimen and the reflected electrons
are collected. The resolving power is from 3-10 nm, so the
resolution is not as good as with transmission electron microscopy
but stunning three-dimensional images of surfaces are produced,
giving us valuable information about the appearance of different
organisms (see Figure 2).
Figure 2 Coloured scanning electron
micrograph of a lymphocyte (white
blood cell). Magnification x 2000
Sample preparation for electron microscopes oo
The inside of an electron microscope is a vacuum to ensure fractured to expose the inside and will then need to be
the electron beams travel in straight lines. Because of this, coated with heavy metals.
samples need to be processed in a specific way.
1 Suggest reasons for the following steps in the
Specimen preparation involves fixation using chemicals
preparation of samples for electron microscopy:
or freezing, staining with heavy metals and dehydration
• fixation • embedding in resin
with solvents. Samples for a TEM will then be set in resin
• dehydration • staining with heavy metals.
and may be stained again. Samples for a SEM may be
BASIC COMPONENTS OF LIVING SYSTEMS
which is bright red. Other bacteria lose the stain and
are exposed to a methylene blue stain, which is blue.
You will often look at slides that have been pre-prepared.
A number of stages are involved in the production of
these slides:
out in schools. One of the main areas covered is health and
safety, including risk assessment. Advice and support is
provided to all types of educational establishments and
their employees about all aspects of practical work such
as the use of chemicals or living organisms, laboratory
design, and even where to obtain the right equipment.
Fixing - chemicals like formaldehyde are used to
preserve specimens in as near-natural a state as
possible.
Sectioning - specimens are dehydrated with alcohols
and then placed in a mould with wax or resin to form a
hard block. This can then be sliced thinly with a knife
called a microtome.
• Staining - specimens are often treated with multiple
stains to show different structures.
Mounting - the specimens are then secured to a
microscope slide and a cover slip placed on top.
CLEAPSS provide student safety sheets that identify specific
risks, advise on the measures to be taken to reduce these
risks and the action to be taken in any emergency.
In fact, in schools many of the microscopy slides that are
used are bought in ready-prepared and pre-stained, not
only because of the harmful nature of the stains but also
because of the long complex process needed to produce
high quality sections.
1 Use your knowledge of the staining technique used
to distinguish Gram-positive from Gram-negative
bacteria and information from the paragraph above
to answer the following question:
Suggest why Gram-negative infections are more
difficult to treat than Gram-positive infections.
Risk management
Many of the stains used in the preparation of slides are
toxic or irritants. A risk assessment must carried out
before any practical is started to identify any procedures
involved that may result in harm.
CLEAPSS (Consortium of Local Education Authorities for
the Provision of Science Services) is the organisation that
provides support for the practical work carried
2 Crystal violet and potassium iodide are chemicals
classed as irritants. Crystal violet is also toxic.
Describe the precautions you should take when
using these chemicals.
Less is more
Scientific drawings are line drawings not pictures. They are used to highlight
particular features and should not include unnecessary detail. The focus
can be changed to help draw selected features.
The following is a list of rules for producing good scientific drawings:
• include a title
state magnification
• use a sharp pencil for drawings and labels
use white, unlined paper
. use as much of the paper as possible for the drawing
draw smooth, continuous lines
do not shade
draw clearly defined structures
ensure proportions are correct
label lines should not cross and should not have arrow heads
label lines should be parallel to the top of the page and drawn with a ruler
•
