6.3 Meiosis
chromatids of homologous
chromosomes twist around
one another, crossing over
many times
paternal
chromosome
Meiosis 1
Meiosis 2
simplified representation
of a single cross over
parent cell with
maternal homologous
chromosome chromosomes
point of breakage
after cross over
homologous
(chiasmata)
and recombination
chromosomes
are separated into
result of a single cross
different cells
over showing equivalent
chromatids are separated
portions of the chromatid
by a further division - all four
having been exchanged
cells produced have a different
genetic composition
A Figure 4 Summary of meiosis after crossing over occurs resulting in
genetic variation
(recombinant chromosomes)
Figure 3 Crossing over
During meiosis I, chromosomes can
line up in different ways before the
homologous chromosomes separate.
Summary questions
blue eyes
red hair
1 a State which division in meiosis is a reduction
division.
(1 mark)
bExplain why a reduction division is necessary
in the production of gametes.
(2 marks)
2 Explain the meaning of the term homologous
chromosomes.
(2 marks)
brown eyes
black hair
3 Outline how you could observe meiosis in a
plant cell.
(4 marks)
blue eyes
black hair
4 Explain how crossing over and independent
assortment lead to genetic variation. (4 marks)
5 a Copy the diagram below and label the alleles
on the recombinant chromosomes. (3 marks)
brown eyes
red hair
b Suggest the importance of the creation of different
allele combinations in populations. (4 marks)
Figure 5 The pole that maternal or paternal homologous
chromosomes face is due to random independent
assortment and can result in many different combinations
of alleles on either side of the metaphase plate
132
6.2 Mitosis
Study tip
Don't say that centromeres 'split –
they divide during anaphase.
Anaphase
The centromeres holding together the pairs of chromatids in each
chromosome divide during anaphase. The chromatids are separated -
pulled to opposite poles of the cell by the shortening spindle fibres.
Spindle fibres do not contract
but shorten as sections of protein
are removed.
The characteristic 'V' shape of the chromatids moving towards the
poles is a result of them being dragged by their centromeres through
the liquid cytosol.
sister
chromatids
separate
A Figure 9 Anaphase
A Figure 8 Light micrograph of an onion root tip cell during anaphase. The sister
chromatids are moved to separate poles by shortening spindle fibres
Telophase
In telophase the chromatids have reached the poles and are now
called chromosomes. The two new sets of chromosomes assemble
at each pole and the nuclear envelope reforms around them.
The chromosomes start to uncoil and the nucleolus is formed.
Cell division - or cytokinesis, begins.
Figure 10 Light micrograph of onion
root tip cells during telophase. Sister
chromatids have been moved to separate
poles by spindle fibres and cell division
begins
A Figure 11 Telophase
Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis, the actual division of the cell into two separate cells,
begins during telophase.
Animal cells
In animal cells a cleavage furrow forms around the middle of
the cell. The cell-surface membrane is pulled inwards by the
cytoskeleton until it is close enough to fuse around the middle,
forming two cells (Figure 13).
126
CELL DIVISION
seamlessly from one to another. Each of these phases can be viewed
and indentified using a light microscope. Dividing cells can be easily
obtained from growing root tips of plants. The root tips can be treated
with a chemical to allow the cells to be separated - then they can be
squashed to form a single layer of cells on a microscope slide. Stains
that bind DNA are used to make the chromosomes clearly visible.
The description of the four stages with example micrographs and
labelled diagrams will help you to identify each phase in your own
cell sections:
OVI
2
D
Prophase
1 During prophase, chromatin fibres (complex made up of
various proteins, RNA and DNA) begin to coil and condense
to form chromosomes that will take up stain to become visible
under the light microscope. The nucleolus, a distinct area of the
nucleus responsible for RNA synthesis, disappears. The nuclear
membrane begins to break down.
Protein microtubules form spindle-shaped structures linking the
poles of the cell. The fibres forming the spindle are necessary
to move the chromosomes into the correct positions before
division.
3 In animal cells and some plant cells, two centrioles migrate to
opposite poles of the cell. The centrioles are cylindrical bundles
of proteins that help in the formation of the spindle.
4 The spindle fibres attach to specific areas on the centromeres
and start to move the chromosomes to the centre of the cell.
5 By the end of prophase the nuclear envelope has disappeared.
Figure 3 Light micrograph of an
onion (Allium spp.) root tip cell during
prophase. The chromosomes are
beginning to condense into defined
units, which will allow organised and
equal segregation into daughter cells
centromere centrioles
microtubules
nuclear envelope
disintegrates
chromosome
consisting of two
sister chromatids
Figure 4 Early prophase
spindle
microtubules
A Figure 5 Late prophase
Metaphase
During metaphase the
chromosomes are moved by the
spindle fibres to form a plane in
the centre of the cell, called the
metaphase plate, and then held
in position.
metaphase
plate equator
> mitotic spindle
Figure 6 Light micrograph
of an onion root tip cell during
metaphase. The chromosomes
are organized in a plane across
the centre of the cell
A Figure 7 Metaphase
125
CELL DIVISION
Meiosis II
Prophase 2
In prophase 2 the chromosomes, which still consist
of two chromatids, condense and become visible
again. The nuclear envelope breaks down and
spindle formation begins.
Prophase II
Metaphase 2
Metaphase 2 differs from metaphase 1, as
the individual chromosomes assemble on the
metaphase plate, as in metaphase in mitosis.
Due to crossing over, the chromatids are no longer
identical so there is independent assortment
again and more genetic variation produced in
metaphase II.
Metaphase II
Anaphase 2
Unlike anaphase 1, anaphase 2 results in the
chromatids of the individual chromosomes
being pulled to opposite poles after division of
the centromeres – the same as in anaphase
of mitosis.
Anaphase II
Telophase 2
The chromatids assemble at the poles at
telophase 2 as in telophase of mitosis. The
chromosomes uncoil and form chromatin again.
The nuclear envelope reforms and the nucleolus
becomes visible.
Telophase II
Cytokinesis results in division of the cells forming
four daughter cells in total. The cells will be
haploid due to the reduction division. They will
also be genetically different from each other,
and from the parent cell, due to the processes of
crossing over and independent assortment.
131
CELL DIVISION
Summary questions
1 Mitosis and cytokinesis are processes involved in the production of new
cells. Explain the difference between mitosis and cytokinesis. (2 marks)
2 Explain, with reference to the structure and function of proteins, the
importance of G, checkpoint.
(3 marks)
3 Telomeres are repetitive sequences of DNA at the ends of chromosomes.
They protect the genes at the end of chromosomes and stop the ends
of chromosomes fusing. DNA is not replicated all the way to the end so
every time DNA replication occurs the telomeres shorten. This limits the
number of times a cell can replicate, it is called the Hayflick limit.
a Suggest a disadvantage of indefinite cell division. (3 marks)
b Telomerases are enzymes that result in the elongation of telomeres.
They are not usually present in differentiated cells. Describe what the
presence of telomerases could cause.
(2 marks)
4 A typical human cell contains 3 x 10° base pairs of DNA divided into
46 chromosomes.
DNA replication in eukaryotic cells takes place at the rate of about
50 base pairs per minute.
a Suggest why the length of DNA is usually given by the number of base
pairs rather than number of nucleotides.
(1 mark)
b Calculate the time it would take to replicate a section of DNA of this
length, assuming replication started at one end and didn't stop until
reaching the other end.
(3 marks)
c The DNA of a eukaryotic cell is usually replicated in eight hours.
Explain how this is possible.
(2 marks)
d Suggest why it takes a much shorter time to replicate the genome of
a prokaryotic cell.
(1 mark)
123
CELL DIVISION
Meiosis II – the second division is similar to mitosis, and the pairs
of chromatids present in each daughter cell are separated, forming
two more cells. Four haploid daughter cells are produced in total.
paternal
chromosome
Meiosis 1
Meiosis 2
maternal
chromosome
parent cell showing
a single pair of
homologous
chromosomes
homologous
chromosomes
are separated into
different cells
chromatids
are separated by
a further division
into four cells
each with a single
chromatid
A Figure 2 Summary of meiosis simplified to a single homologous pair
Meiosis
Prophase 1
During prophase 1, chromosomes condense, the
nuclear envelope disintegrates, the nucleolus
disappears and spindle formation begins, as in
prophase of mitosis.
nuclear envelope
spindle microtubules
and centriole
Prophase 1
The difference in prophase 1 is that the
homologous chromosomes pair up, forming
bivalents. Chromosomes are large molecules
of DNA and moving them through the liquid
cytoplasm as they are brought together results in
the chromatids entangling. This is called crossing
over (Figure 3).
129
6.3 Meiosis
Metaphase 1
Metaphase 1 is the same as metaphase in
mitosis except that the homologous pairs of
chromosomes assemble along the metaphase
plate instead of the individual chromosomes.
bivalents aligned
on the equator
Metaphase 1
The orientation of each homologous pair on the
metaphase plate is random and independent
of any other homologous pair. The maternal or
paternal chromosomes can end up facing either
pole. This is called independent assortment, and
can result in many different combinations of
alleles facing the poles (Figure 5). Independent
assortment of chromosomes in metaphase 1
results in genetic variation.
Anaphase 1
Anaphase 1 is different from anaphase of mitosis
as the homologous chromosomes are pulled to
the opposite poles and the chromatids stay joined
to each other.
homologous
chromosomes
being pulled to
opposite poles
Anaphase 1
Sections of DNA on 'sister' chromatids, which
became entangled during crossing over, now
break off and rejoin - sometimes resulting in
an exchange of DNA. The points at which the
chromatids break and rejoin are called chiasmata.
When exchange occurs this forms recombinant
chromatids, with genes being exchanged
between chromatids. The genes being exchanged
may be different alleles of the same gene,
meaning the combination of alleles on the
recombinant chromatids will be different from
the allele combination on either the original
chromatids (Figure 4). Genetic variation arises
from this new combinations of alleles - the
sister chromatids are no longer identical.
Telophase 1
Telophase 1 is essentially the same as telophase
in mitosis. The chromosomes assemble at
each pole and the nuclear membrane reforms.
Chromosomes uncoil.
cell will divide
across the equator
Telophase 1
The cell undergoes cytokinesis and divides into two
cells. The reduction of chromosome number from
diploid to haploid is complete.
130
6.2 Mitosis
Specification reference: 2.1.6
.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the significance of mitosis in
life cycles
► the main stages of mitosis
microscopic sections of plant
tissue showing the cell cycle
and stages of mitosis.
The importance of mitosis
Mitosis is the term usually used to describe the entire process of
cell division in eukaryotic cells. It actually refers to nuclear division
(division of the nucleus), an essential stage in cell division. Mitosis
ensures that both daughter cells produced when a parent cell divides
are genetically identical (except in the rare events where mutations
occur). Each new cell will have an exact copy of the DNA present in
the parent cell and the same number of chromosomes.
Mitosis is necessary when all the daughter cells have to be identical.
This is the case during growth, replacement and repair of tissues in
multicellular organisms such as animals, plants, and fungi. Mitosis is
also necessary for asexual reproduction, which is the production
of genetically identical offspring from one parent in multicellular
organisms including plants, fungi, and some animals, and also in
eukaryotic single-celled organisms such as Ameoba species. Prokaryotic
organisms, including bacteria, do not have a nucleus and they
reproduce asexually by a different process known as binary fission.
Synoptic link
Chromosomes
Before mitosis can occur, all of the DNA in the nucleus is replicated during
interphase (Topic 6.1, The cell cycle). Each DNA molecule (chromosome)
is converted into two identical DNA molecules, called chromatids.
You learnt about chromosome
structure in Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic
cell structure.
The two chromatids are joined together at a region called the
centromere. It is necessary to keep the chromatids together during
mitosis so that they can be precisely manoeuvred and segregated
equally, one each into the two new daughter cells (Figures 1 and 2).
During interphase DNA combines with proteins called histones to form
a dense complex called chromatin.
one chromosome
(before replication )
centromere
one chromosome
(after replication)
one chromosome
(after mitotic division)
centromere
one chromatid per
two chromatids
one chromatid
chromosome
per chromosome
per chromosome
A Figure 1 Each chromosome replicates during cell division to form an identical
copy, or chromatid. The chromatids of a pair are joined at the centromere
A Figure 2 Scanning electron
micrograph of replicated human
chromosomes consisting of chromatid
pairs joined at the centromere (3000
magnification)
The stages of mitosis
There are four stages of mitosis - prophase, metaphase, anaphase,
and telophase. We describe them separately but in fact they flow
124
CELL DIVISION
6.1 The cell cycle
Specification reference: 2.1.6
The cell cycle is a highly ordered sequence of events that takes place
in a cell, resulting in division of the cell, and the formation of two
genetically identical daughter cells.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the cell cycle
→ how the cell cycle is regulated. :
Phases of the cell cycle
In eukaryotic cells the cell cycle has two main phases - interphase and
mitotic (division) phase.
the cell checks the
duplicated chromosomes
for error, making any
repairs that
are needed.,
mitosis
Interphase
Cells do not divide continuously - long periods of growth and
normal working separate divisions. These periods are called
interphase and a cell spends the majority of its time in
this phase.
Interphase is sometimes referred to as the resting phase as
cells are not actively dividing. However, this is not an accurate
description - interphase is actually a very active phase of
the cell cycle, when the cell is carrying out all of its major
functions such as producing enzymes or hormones, while also
actively preparing for cell division.
cytokinesis
G1
each of the Chase
chromosomes
is duplicated cellular contents,
apart from the
chromosomes
are duplicated.
During interphase:
Figure 1 The cell cycle showing the
stages of interphase
DNA is replicated and checked for errors in the nucleus
protein synthesis occurs in the cytoplasm
mitochondria grow and divide, increasing in number in the
cytoplasm
chloroplasts grow and divide in plant and algal cell cytoplasm,
increasing in number
the normal metabolic processes of cells occur (some, including cell
respiration, also occur throughout cell division).
Synoptic link
You learnt about DNA replication
in Topic 3.9, DNA replication and
the genetic code. You learnt about
protein synthesis in Topic 2.4,
Eukaryotic cell structure and
Topic 3.10, Protein synthesis.
The three stages of interphase, as shown in Figure 1 are:
• G - the first growth phase: proteins from which organelles
are synthesised are produced and organelles replicate. The cell
increases in size.
S-synthesis phase: DNA is replicated in the nucleus.
. G, - the second growth phase: the cell continues to increase
in size, energy stores are increased and the duplicated DNA is
checked for errors.
Study tip
Interphase is not a stage in cell
division (mitosis) but the stage
between cell divisions. Interphase
is the longest phase of the
cell cycle.
Mitotic phase
The mitotic phase is the period of cell division. Cell division involves
two stages:
120
6.4 The organisation and specialisation of cells
Sperm cells are male gametes. Their function is to deliver
genetic information to the female gamete, the ovum
(or egg). Sperm have a tail or flagellum, so they are
capable of movement and contain many mitochondria to
supply the energy needed to swim. The acrosome on the
head of the sperm contains digestive enzymes, which are
released to digest the protective layers around the ovum
and allow the sperm to penetrate, leading to fertilisation.
haploid nucleus
& acrosome
mid-piece
(7 um long)
tail (40 u m long, two-thirds of
it omitted from this drawing)
head (3 um wide and 4 um long)
microtubules (in a
centriole
9+2 arrangement)
helical
protein fibres to
plasma mitochondria
strengthen the tail
membrane
Table 2 Specialised plant cells
cellulose
cell wall
cell-surface
membrane
Palisade cells present in the mesophyll contain
chloroplasts to absorb large amounts of light for
photosynthesis. The cells are rectangular box shapes,
which can be closely packed to form a continuous layer.
They have thin cell walls, increasing the rate of diffusion
of carbon dioxide. They have a large vacuole to maintain
turgor pressure. Chloroplasts can move within the
cytoplasm in order to absorb more light.
chloroplasts
25–75 um
cytoplasm
vacuole
containing
cell sap
I nucleus
20-150 um
Root hair cells, present at the surfaces of roots near
the growing tips, have long extensions called root
hairs, which increase the surface area of the cell.
This maximises the uptake of water and minerals
from the soil.
nucleus
cellulose
cell wall
cytoplasm-
thin cellulose
cell wall
vacuole containing cell
sap- solution of ions and cell-surface
sugars, lower water potential membrane
15-20 pm
b Stoma open
thin outer wall
Pairs of guard cells on the surfaces of leaves form
small openings called stomata. These are necessary
for carbon dioxide to enter plants for photosynthesis.
When guard cells lose water and become less swollen
as a result of osmotic forces, they change shape and
the stoma closes to prevent further water loss from the
plant. The cell wall of a guard cell is thicker on one side
so the cell does not change shape symmetrically as its
volume changes.
a Stoma closed
chloroplast
cytoplasm
vacuole
nucleus
thick inner wall
stomatal aperture
Tissues
A tissue is made up of a collection of differentiated cells that have a
specialised function or functions. As a result, each tissue is adapted for
a particular function within the organism.
134
6.4 The organisation and
specialisation of cells
Specification reference: 2.1.6
As you have learnt, the basic unit of life is a cell. But many
organisms are multicellular - they are made up of not one but
hundreds, thousands or millions of cells. Although these cells within
a single organism have common features such as membranes,
organelles, and nuclei, they are not all identical. Different cells within
an organism are specialised for different roles and organised into
efficient biological structures, each with a particular function.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ how cells of multicellular
organisms are specialised
the organisation of cells
into tissues, organs and
organ systems.
Levels of organisation in multicellular organisms
The organisation of a multicellular organism can be summarised as:
specialised cells → tissues → organs → organ systems
whole organism
Specialised cells
The cells within a multicellular organism are differentiated, meaning
they are specialised to carry out very specific functions. You will
explore cell differentiation further in the next topic.
Some examples of specialised cells are given in the following tables.
Table 1 Specialised animal cells. Dimensions given are according to cells in a human
cytoplasm containing haemoglobin
-2.0 um
side view
Erythrocytes or red blood cells have a flattened
biconcave shape, which increases their surface
area to volume ratio. This is essential to their role of
transporting oxygen around the body. In mammals
these cells do not have nuclei or many other organelles,
which increases the space available for haemoglobin,
the molecule that carries oxygen. They are also flexible
so that they are able to squeeze through narrow
capillaries.
- average 7.5 um
top view
granular cytoplasm
Neutrophils (a type of white blood cell) play an
essential role in the immune system. They have a
characteristic multi-lobed nucleus, which makes it
easier for them to squeeze through small gaps to get to
the site of infections. The granular cytoplasm contains
many lysosomes that contain enzymes used to attack
pathogens.
- multi-lobed nucleus
10-14 um
133
CELL DIVISION
There are four main categories of tissues in animals:
Synoptic link
You will learn about water transport
in plants in Topic 9.2, Water
transport in multicellular plants.
nervous tissue, adapted to support the transmission of electrical
impulses
epithelial tissue, adapted to cover body surfaces, internal and
external
muscle tissue, adapted to contract
connective tissue, adapted either to hold other tissues together
or as a transport medium.
Some examples of specialised tissues in animals are given in Table 3.
Table 3 Specialised animal tissues
single layer of squamous cells
Squamous epithelium, made up of specialised squamous
epithelial cells, is sometimes known as pavement
epithelium due to its flat appearance. It is very thin due to
the squat or flat cells that make it up and also because it is
only one cell thick. It is present when rapid diffusion across
a surface is essential. It forms the lining of the lungs and
allows rapid diffusion of oxygen into the blood.
basement membrane
mucus
cilia
cytoplasm
Ciliated epithelium is made up of ciliated epithelial cells.
The cells have 'hair-like' structures called cilia on one
surface that move in a rhythmic manner. Ciliated epithelium
lines the trachea, for example, causing mucus to be
swept away from the lungs. Goblet cells are also present,
releasing mucus to trap any unwanted particles present in
the air. This prevents the particles, which may be bacteria,
from reaching the alveoli once inside the lungs.
nucleus
basement
membrane
goblet cell
i light micrograph x 100
magnification
chondrocyte cells
Cartilage is a connective tissue found in the outer ear, nose
and at the ends of (and between) bones. It contains fibres
of the proteins elastin and collagen. Cartilage is a firm,
flexible connective tissue composed of chondrocyte cells
embedded in an extracellular matrix. Cartilage, among
other things, prevents the ends of bones from rubbing
together and causing damage. Many fish have whole
skeletons made of cartilage, not bone.
extracellular matrix
(containing elastin)
light micrograph x 100
magnification
(longitudinal section)
Muscle is a tissue that needs to be able to shorten in length
(contract) in order to move bones, which in turn move the
different parts of the body. There are different types of
muscle fibres. Skeletal muscle fibres (muscles which are
attached to bone) contain myofibrils (dark pink bands on
the micrograph) which contain contractile proteins.
muscle fibres
connective tissue
The skeletal muscle micrograph shown here has several
individual muscle fibres (pink) separated by connective
tissue (thin white strips).
135
CELL DIVISION
6
Mitosis - the nucleus divides.
Cytokinesis - the cytoplasm divides and two cells are produced.
.
The processes that take place during mitosis and cytokinesis (division of
the cell into two separate cells) are discussed in more detail in Topic 6.2,
Mitosis.
G, is the name given to the phase when the cell leaves the cycle,
either temporarily or permanently. There are a number of reasons for
this including:
Differentiation - A cell that becomes specialised to carry out a
particular function (differentiated) is no longer able to divide. It will
carry out this function indefinitely and not enter the cell cycle again
(you will learn more about cell specialisation and differentiation in
Topic 6.4, The organisation and specialisation of cells).
The DNA of a cell may be damaged, in which case it is no longer
viable. A damaged cell can no longer divide and enters a period of Synoptic link
permanent cell arrest (Go). The majority of normal cells only divide
You will learn about the primary
a limited number of times and eventually become senescent.
immune response in Topic 12.6,
As you age, the number of these cells in your body increases.
The specific immune system.
Growing numbers of senescent cells have been linked with many
age related diseases, such as cancer and arthritis.
A few types of cells that enter G, can be stimulated to go back into the
Synoptic link
cell cycle and start dividing again, for example lymphocytes (white
You learnt about the cytoskeleton
blood cells) in an immune response.
of cells, including spindle fibres, in
Topic 2.4, Eukaryotic cell structure.
Control of the cell cycle
It is vital to ensure a cell only divides when it has grown to the
right size, the replicated DNA is error-free (or is repaired) and the
chromosomes are in their correct positions during mitosis. This is to
ensure the fidelity of cell division – that two identical daughter cells
are created from the parent cell.
Checkpoints are the control mechanisms of the cell cycle. They
monitor and verify whether the processes at each phase of
resting
the cell cycle have been accurately completed before the state
spindle assembly checkpoint
cell is allowed to progress into the next phase.
Check for:
• chromosome attachment
Checkpoints occur at various stages of the G2 checkpoint
to spindle
cell cycle:
Check for:
. cell size
G, checkpoint - This checkpoint is at the
• DNA replication
• DNA damage
G checkpoint
end of the G, phase, before entry into S
Check for:
phase. If the cell satisfies the requirements
• cell size
• nutrients
of this checkpoint (Figure 2) it is triggered
• growth factors
to begin DNA replication. If not, it enters
(DNA synthesis)
• DNA damage
a resting state (Go).
resting
• G, checkpoint - This checkpoint is at
state (Go)
the end of G, phase, before the start of
A Figure 2 Checkpoints controlling the cell cycle
mitosis
G2
121
6.1 The cell cycle
Study tip
You do not need to memorise the
details of all the checkpoint proteins
and enzymes, but you should
understand in overview, how the cell
cycle is controlled by checkpoints.
the mitotic phase. In order for this checkpoint to be passed, the
cell has to check a number of factors (Figure 2), including whether
the DNA has been replicated without error. If this checkpoint is
passed, the cell initiates the molecular processes that signal the
beginning of mitosis (Topic 6.2, Mitosis).
Spindle assembly checkpoint (also called metaphase checkpoint):
This checkpoint is at the point in mitosis where all the
chromosomes should be attached to spindles and have aligned
(metaphase - Topic 6.2, Mitosis). Mitosis cannot proceed until this
checkpoint is passed.
Cell-cycle regulation and cancer
( anaphase-promoting complex
degraded
mitotic cyclin
active mitotic
CDK-cyclin
The passing of a cell-cycle checkpoint
is brought about by kinases. These are
a class of enzyme that catalyse the
addition of a phosphate group to a protein
(phosphorylation). Phosphorylation
changes the tertiary structure of
checkpoint proteins, activating them at
certain points in the cell cycle.
CADP
mitotic
(PD
CDK
ATP
kinases
G cyclin
CDK XV
FIL
mitotic
cyclin
ATP
kinases
etc.
spindle
assembly
checkpoint
checkpoint
G checkpoint
mitotic
CDK
(ADP)
Kinases involved in cell-cycle regulation
are activated by binding to a variety
of checkpoint proteins called cyclins.
Binding of the correct cyclin to the
appropriate kinase forms a cyclin-
dependent kinase (CDK) complex. These
complexes are activated by enzymes.
active
G CDK-cyclin
w
CDK complexes catalyse the
activation of key cell-cycle proteins by
CDK
phosphorylation. This ensures a cell
progresses through the different phases
degraded
of its cycle at the appropriate times.
Gj cyclin
Different enzymes break down cyclins A Figure 3 Cell-cycle regulation
when they are not needed, signalling a cell
For example, if overexpression of a cyclin gene results
to move into the next phase of the cycle.
from mutation, the abnormally large quantity of cyclins
produced would disrupt the regulation of the cell cycle,
Cancer is a group of many different diseases caused by
resulting in uncontrolled cell division, tumour formation,
the uncontrolled division of cells. An abnormal mass
and possibly leading to cancer.
of cells is called a tumour. Tumours can be benign,
meaning that they stop growing and do not travel to Cyclin-dependent kinases can be used as a possible
other locations in the body. If a tumour continues to grow target for chemical inhibitors in the treatment of cancer. If
unchecked and uncontrolled, it is termed malignant. A the activity of CDKs can be reduced it may reduce or stop
malignant tumour is the basis of cancer.
cell division and therefore cancer formation.
Tumours are often the result of damage or spontaneous
mutation of the genes that encode the proteins that
are involved in regulating the cell cycle, including the
checkpoint proteins.
1 Compare the roles of cyclins and enzyme
inhibitors. Describe any similarities and/or
differences between their roles.
122
6.4 The organisation and specialisation of cells
There are a number of different tissues in plants, including:
Synoptic link
•
epidermis tissue, adapted to cover plant surfaces
vascular tissue, adapted for transport of water and nutrients.
You will learn more about the
structure and function of the xylem
and phloem in Topic 9.1, Transport
systems in dicotolyedonous plants.
Some examples of specialised tissues in plants are given in the
Table 4.
Table 4 Specialised plant tissues
light micrograph x 100
magnification
stomata
The epidermis is a single layer of closely packed cells
covering the surfaces of plants. It is usually covered by
a waxy, waterproof cuticle to reduce the loss of water.
Stomata, formed by a pair of guard cells that can open and
close (Table 2) are present in the epidermis. They allow
carbon dioxide in and out, and water vapour and oxygen in
and out
light micrograph x 20 magnification
(longitudinal section)
Xylem tissue is a type of vascular tissue responsible for
transport of water and minerals throughout plants. The
tissue is composed of vessel elements, which are elongated
dead cells. The walls of these cells are strengthened
with a waterproof material called lignin (pink rings in the
micrograph), which provides structural support for plants.
TITETTU
parenchyma
cells
vessel
elements
lignin
Phloem tissue is another type of vascular tissue in
plants, responsible for the transport of organic nutrients,
particularly sucrose, from leaves and stems where it is
made by photosynthesis to all parts of the plant where it
is needed. It is composed of columns of sieve tube cells
separated by perforated walls called sieve plates.
light micrograph x 50
magnification
(longitudinal section)
sieve tube
- sieve plate
parenchyma cells
Synoptic link
You will learn about the structure of
the heart in Topic 8.5 The heart.
Organs
An organ is a collection of tissues that are adapted to perform a
particular function in an organism. For example, the mammalian
heart is an organ that is adapted for pumping blood around the body.
It is made up of muscle tissue and connective tissue. The leaf is a plant
organ that is adapted for photosynthesis. it contains epidermis tissues
and vascular tissue (Figure 1).
136
CELL DIVISION
5
6
The diagram below shows the relative
times that cells can spend in each stage of
the cell cycle.
hours
0
15
M
phase
G phase
G phase
Stem cells are being investigated as a possible
cure for certain types of diabetes. In type 1
diabetes the immune system recognises the
beta cells in the pancreas, which produce
insulin, as foreign and destroys them. Stem
cells, which can be obtained from different
sources, can be used to replace the beta cells
that have been destroyed.
Some of these stem cells are particular useful
as they do not trigger a response by the
immune system.
a State what is meant by the term stem cell.
(2 marks)
b List three sources of stem cells. (3 marks)
C Explain the meaning of stem cell potency.
(5 marks)
d Describe three examples of the use of
stem cells to reverse disease. (6 marks)
-4
Go state
Sphase
(DNA synthesis)
98
a
Calculate the percentage of the overall
time that the cell spends in interphase.
(2 marks)
Outline the importance of strict regulation
of the cell cycle.
(3 marks)
b
145
Chapter 6 Practice questions
c
b Mitosis is part of the cell cycle. The
figure shows a diagram of the cell cycle
interphase
Copy and complete the table below.
(4 marks)
Mitosis
Meiosis
pair up
Homologous chromosomes
Daughter cells n/2n
Number of cell divisions
Crossing over
The figure below shows drawings of the
six chromosomes inside an animal cell
viewed during later prophase of mitosis.
mitotic
/phase (m)
mitosis
cytokinesis
(i) Name one process that occurs during
stages G, and G
(1 mark)
(ii) During stage S, the genetic
information is copied and checked.
Suggest what might happen if the
genetic information is not checked.
(2 marks)
c During meiosis a cell undergoes two
divisions.
Suggest how cells produced by meiosis
may differ from those produced by
mitosis.
(2 marks)
OCR F211 2009
d
(i) Identify one pair of homologous
chromosomes in the diagram by
drawing around each chromosome in
the pair on the diagram. (1 mark)
The nucleus of a sperm cell is
produced by meiosis.
(ii) Draw a diagram in the space below to
represent the chromosomes that are
present in the nucleus of a sperm cell
from the same animal. (2 marks)
4
a
A fertilised egg cell undergoes mitosis
producing two cells in 36 hours. The cells
continue to undergo mitosis completing
each cycle in eight hours.
Calculate how many cells there will be
present three days after fertilisation.
(2 marks)
(i) Explain why the nuclei of most
human cells contain 46 pairs of
chromosomes.
(2 marks)
(ii) Name the type of cell which contain
half the number of chromosomes
present in a diploid cell. (1 mark)
b
OCR F211 2010
e Explain why prokaryotic cells do not
undergo meiosis.
(3 marks)
144
6.5 Stem cells
Specification reference: 2.1.6
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the features and
differentiation of stem cells
► the production of
erythrocytes and neutrophils
the production of xylem
vessels and phloem sieve
tubes
► the potential uses of stem cells
in research and medicine.
As you explored in the previous topic, the different cells in a
multicellular organism are specialised for different functions. The
process of a cell becoming specialised is called differentiation.
Despite being differentiated in structure and function, all body
cells within an organism have the same DNA (except those like
erythrocytes and sieve tube elements which don't have a nucleus).
Differentiation involves the expression of some genes but not others
in the cell's genome.
Stem cells
All cells in plants and animals begin as undifferentiated cells
and originate from mitosis or meiosis. They are not adapted to any
particular function (they are unspecialised) and they have the potential
to differentiate to become any one of the range of specialised cell types
in the organism. These undifferentiated cells are called stem cells.
Stem cells are able to undergo cell division again and again, and are
the source of new cells necessary for growth, development, and tissue
repair. Once stem cells have become specialised they lose the ability to
divide, entering the G, phase of the cell cycle.
The activity of stem cells has to be strictly controlled. If they do not
divide fast enough then tissues are not efficiently replaced, leading to
ageing. However, if there is uncontrolled division then they form masses
of cells called tumours, which can lead to the development of cancer.
Stem cell potency
A stem cell's ability to differentiate into different cell types is called
potency. The greater the number of cell types it can differentiate into,
the greater its potency. Stem cells differ depending on the type of cell
they can turn into:
Totipotent - these stem cells can differentiate into any type
of cell. A fertilised egg, or zygote and the 8 or 16 cells from
its first few mitotic divisions are totipotent cells, which are
destined eventually to produce a whole organism. They can
also differentiate into extra-embryonic tissues like the amnion
and umbilicus.
Pluripotent - these stem cells can form all tissue types but not
whole organisms. They are present in early embryos and are the
origin of the different types of tissue within an organism.
Multipotent - these stem cells can only form a range of cells
within a certain type of tissue. Haematopoetic stem cells in bone
marrow are multipotent because this gives rise to the various types
of blood cell.
A Figure 1 The stem cell in this
coloured scanning electron micrograph
is destined to become a blood cell.
Some differentiated red blood cells can
also be seen, x 100 magnification
138
CELL DIVISION
Organ systems
Large multicellular organisms have
coordinated organ systems. Each organ
system is composed of a number of organs
working together to carry out a major
function in the body. Animal examples
include:
- upper epidermis
palisade cell layer
the digestive system, which takes in
-vascular bundle
food, breaks down the large insoluble
(phloem and xylem)
molecules into small soluble ones, absorbs
the nutrients into the blood, retains water
needed by the body and removes any
undigested material from the body
. the cardiovascular system, which moves
blood around the body to provide
A Figure 1 A scanning electron micrograph of a leaf cross-section
an effective transport system for the showing the arrangement of different tissues in this organ. 150
substances it carries
magnification
the gaseous exchange system, which brings air into the body so
oxygen can be extracted for respiration, and carbon dioxide can
be expelled
Oves
Summary questions
1 State two examples of epithelial tissue and describe how each
is adapted for its function.
(6 marks)
2 Describe two specialised cells, one that is not usually part of a tissue
and one that is usually found as part of a tissue. In each case explain
how they are adapted to their functions.
(4 marks)
3 The cardiac muscle that makes up most of the heart is a tissue,
but the heart itself is an organ. Explain the difference. (4 marks)
4 Using the digestive system as an example, explain the
relationship between organs in an organ system.
(6 marks)
137
CELL DIVISION
C is made up of not one but hundreds,
thousands or millions of cells
is the smallest structural and
functional unit of B
E is composed of more than one A
working together to carry out a major
function in the organism (1 mark)
The figure shows some drawings of a cell
during different stages of mitosis.
3
a
Practice questions
1 The cell cycle is a highly ordered sequence of
events that takes place in a cell, resulting in
division of the cell.
Which of the following statements is/are
correct with respect to the cell cycle?
Statement 1: S - DNA is replicated in the
nucleus.
Statement 2: G, -the cell continues to
increase in size, energy stores are increased
and the DNA is checked for errors.
Statement 3: G-proteins from which
organelles are synthesised are produced and
organelles replicate.
A 1, 2 and 3 are correct
B Only 1 and 2 are correct
C Only 2 and 3 are correct
D Only 1 is correct
(1 mark)
Fertilised eggs are transported along a
structure called the fallopian tube to the
uterus. The fallopian tubes are lined with
ciliated epithelium.
a Define the term 'differentiation'. (2 marks)
b Describe how ciliated epithelial cells are
adapted to their function
(3 marks)
Explain the difference between ciliated
cells and ciliated epithelium (4 marks)
d Suggest how the ciliated epithelium is
involved in the transport of fertilised eggs.
(2 marks)
List the letters in the correct order to
show correctly increasing levels of
organisation in a living organism.
A is a collection of tissues that are
adapted to perform a particular
function in an organism
B is made up of a collection of
differentiated cells that have a
specialised function
C
*** f
*
Place stages P, Q, R, S and T in the correct
sequence
The first stage has been identified for you.
S....
(4 marks)
143
CELL DIVISION
cleavage furrow
cytoskeleton pulls the membrane inwards
A Figure 13 Cytokinesis in an animal cell
vesicles
cell wall
A Figure 12 Cytokinesis in a human
embryonic kidney cell. Coloured
transmission electron micrograph x 800
magnification
Plant cells
Plant cells have cell walls so it is not
possible for a cleavage furrow to
be formed. Vesicles from the Golgi
apparatus begin to assemble in the
same place as where the metaphase
plate was formed. The vesicles fuse
with each other and the cell surface
membrane, dividing the cell into two
(Figure 15).
nuclear
envelope
cell-surface
membrane
developing
cell plate
New sections of cell wall then form
along the new sections of membrane
(if the dividing cell wall were formed
before the daughter cells separated
they would immediately undergo
osmotic lysis from the surrounding
water).
A Figure 14 Light micrograph
of cytokinesis in an onion root
tip cell
Summary questions
A Figure 15 Cytokinesis in plant cells
1 Explain why we normally see chromosomes as a double
structure containing two chromatids.
(2 marks)
2 Explain why it is essential that DNA replication results in
two exact copies of the genetic material.
(2 marks)
3 Describe the differences between cytokinesis in animal
and plant cells and give reasons for these differences.
(4 marks)
(2 marks)
4 How many chromatids would be present in a human cell at
prophase and at 6, during interphase?
5 Explain why plant root tips are a good source of cells to
examine for mitosis.
(4 marks)
127
CELL DIVISION
Differentiation
Multicellular organisms like animals and plants have evolved from
unicellular (single-celled) organisms because groups of cells with
different functions working together as one unit can make use of
resources more efficiently than single cells operating on their own.
In multicellular organisms cells have to specialise to take on different
roles in tissues and organs. They may be required to form barriers such
as skin or be motile such as sperm cells. Cells have adapted to different
roles in an organism and so have many shapes and sizes) and often
contain different organelles.
Erythrocytes (red blood cells) and neutrophils (white blood cells) are
both present in blood (Topic 6.4, Table 1). They look very different
because they have different functions. When cells differentiate they
become adapted to their specific role. What form this adaptation takes
is dependent on the function of the tissue, organ and organ system to
which the cell belongs.
All blood cells are derived from stem cells in the bone marrow.
Replacement of red and white blood cells
Mammalian erythrocytes are essential for the transport of oxygen
around the body. They are adapted to maximise their oxygen-carrying
capacity by having only a few organelles so there is more room for
haemoglobin.
Figure 2 Light micrograph of human
blood-red blood cells (erythrocytes)
are pink and the purple cells are white
blood cells (from left to right a monocyte,
a neutrophil and a lymphocyte), x 500
magnification
Due to the lack of nucleus and organelles they only have a short
lifespan of around 120 days. They therefore need to be replaced
constantly. The stem cell colonies in the bone marrow produce
approximately three billion erythrocytes per kilogram of body mass
per day to keep up with the demand.
Neutrophils have an essential role in the immune system. They live
for only about 6 hours and the colonies of stem cells in bone marrow
produce in the region of 1.6 billion per kg per hour. This figure will
increase during infection.
Sources of animal stem cells
Embryonic stem cells - these cells are present at a very early
stage of embryo development and are totipotent. After about
seven days a mass of cells, called a blastocyst, has formed and the
cells are now in a pluripotent state. They remain in this state in
the fetus until birth.
Tissue (adult) stem cells – these cells are present throughout
life from birth. They are found in specific areas such as bone
marrow. They are multipotent, although there is growing
evidence that they can be artificially triggered to become
pluripotent. Stem cells can also be harvested from the umbilical
cords of newborn babies. The advantages of this source are the
plentiful supply of umbilical cords and that invasive surgery is not
needed. These stem cells can be stored in case they are ever
Figure 3 Scanning electron
micrograph of human embryonic
stem cell, < 500 magnification
139
6
6.5 Stem cells
needed by the individual in the future, and tissues cultured
from such stem cells would not be rejected in a transplant to the
umbilicus' owner.
Sources of plant stem cells
Stem cells are present in meristematic tissue (meristems) in
plants. This tissue is found wherever growth is occurring in plants, for
example at the tips of roots and shoots (termed apical meristems).
Meristematic tissue is also located sandwiched between the phloem
and xylem tissues and this is called the vascular cambium. Cells
originating from this region differentiate into the different cells
present in xylem and phloem tissues (Topic 6.4, The organisation and
specialisation of cells). In this way the vascular tissue grows as the
plant grows. The pluripotent nature of stem cells in the meristems
continues throughout the life of the plant.
Figure 4 Scanning electron
micrograph of a shoot apical meristem
(purple) on a flowering plant. Floral buds
(red) are appearing between developing
young leaves (green). The coloration
seen here is computer generated, x 300
magnification
Uses of stem cells
Stem cells transplanted into specific areas have the potential to treat
certain diseases, such as:
heart disease – muscle tissue in the heart is damaged as a result
of a heart attack, normally irreparably – this has been tried
experimentally with some success already
type 1 diabetes - with insulin-dependent diabetes the body's
own immune system destroys the insulin-producing cells in the
pancreas; patients have to inject insulin for life – this has been
tried experimentally with some success already
Parkinson's disease - the symptoms (shaking and rigidity) are
caused by the death of dopamine-producing cells in the brain;
drugs currently only delay the progress of the disease
Alzheimer's disease - brain cells are destroyed as a result of the
build up of abnormal proteins; drugs currently only alleviate
the symptoms
macular degeneration - this condition is responsible for causing
blindness in the elderly and diabetics; scientists are currently
researching the use of stem cells in its treatment and early results
are very encouraging
birth defects – scientists have already successfully reversed previously
untreatable birth defects in model organisms such as mice.
• spinal injuries – scientists have restored some movement to the hind
limbs of rats with damaged spinal cords using stem cell implants.
Stem cells are already used in such diverse areas as:
the treatment of burns - stem cells grown on biodegradable meshes
can produce new skin for burn patients, this is quicker than the
normal process of taking a graft from another part of the body
drug trials - potential new drugs can be tested on cultures of
stem cells before being tested on animals and humans
140
6.3 Meiosis
Specification reference: 2.1.6
Normal cells have two chromosomes of each type (termed diploid) –
one inherited from each parent. During mitosis the nucleus divides
once following DNA replication. This results in two genetically
identical diploid daughter cells.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the significance of meiosis in
life cycles
► the main stages of meiosis.
In sexual reproduction two sex cells (gametes), one from each parent,
fuse to produce a fertilised egg. The fertilised egg (zygote) is the origin
of all the cells that the organism develops. Gametes must therefore
only contain half of the standard (diploid) number of chromosomes in
a cell or the chromosome number of an organism would double with
every round of reproduction.
Synoptic link
You learnt about the structure of
DNA and the nature of genes in
Topic 3.9, DNA replication and the
genetic code.
Gametes are formed by another form of cell division known as meiosis.
Unlike in mitosis, the nucleus divides twice to produce four daughter
cells - the gametes. Each gamete contains half of the chromosome
number of the parent cell - it is haploid. Meiosis is therefore known as
reduction division.
Homologous chromosomes
As you will remember, each characteristic of an organism is coded
for by two copies of each gene, one from each parent. Each nucleus
of the organism's cells contains two full sets of genes, a pair of genes
for each characteristic. Therefore each nucleus contains matching sets
of chromosomes, called homologous chromosomes, and is termed
diploid. Each chromosome in a homologous pair has the same genes at
the same loci.
gene for eye colour
gene for enzyme A
gene for cytochrome C -
a duplicated
chromosome
(from mother)
a duplicated
chromosome
(from father)
Alleles
Genes for a particular characteristic may vary, leading to
differences in the characteristic, for example blue eyes and brown
eyes. The genes are still the same type as they both code for eye
colour but the colour is different, meaning they are different
versions of the same gene. Different versions of the same gene are
called alleles (also known as gene variants). The different alleles
of a gene will all have the same locus (position on a particular
chromosome).
A Figure 1 A homologous pair of
chromosomes. The same genes and all the
alleles of that gene will appear at the same
position (locus) on the chromosome
As homologous chromosomes have the same genes in the same
positions, they will be the same length and size when they are visible in
prophase. The centromeres will also be in the same positions.
The stages of meiosis
As discussed at the start of this topic, meiosis involves two divisions:
Study tip
When answering questions about
genes and alleles it is important to
use the correct term for the context.
"Allele' or 'gene variant should be
used when referring to different
versions of a gene.
Meiosis I - the first division is the reduction division when the
pairs of homologous chromosomes are separated into two cells.
Each intermediate cell will only contain one full set of genes
instead of two, so the cells are haploid.
128
6.5 Stem cells
leukaemia. However, gene therapy is still seen as having
the most potential for treating SCID in the future.
More recently experimental gene therapy has been used
to treat SCID. The aim is that stem cells from the patient's
own bone marrow are removed and genetically modified
so that they function normally to produce the white blood
cells needed. These are then put back into the patient and
the condition should be corrected.
This treatment was initially successful in a small number
of children, but in some of the children another gene was
damaged in the process and they went on to develop
1 Explain how this condition can be cured using a
bone marrow transplant.
2 Explain the risks of a bone marrow transplant
from a donor, and how the gene therapy described
removes this risk.
3 Suggest why some patients receiving this gene
therapy developed cancer.
Plant stem cells and medicines oo
Plant stem cells have a huge potential role to play in
medicine. Many drugs used in medicines are derived
from plants. Plant stem cells can be cultured, leading to
an unlimited, and cheap, supply of plant-based drugs.
process difficult and expensive. An alternative way of
producing the drug was developed using a related plant
but it is still a difficult and expensive process. Recently
stem cells from the yew tree have been used to produce
paclitaxel cheaply and in sustainable quantities.
Paclitaxel is a common drug used in the treatment
of breast and lung cancer. It cannot be chemically
synthesised and must be obtained from the bark of yew
trees (Taxus brevifolia). The trees have to be mature,
which means the supply is limited and the extraction
1 Suggest an environmental benefit of the use of
plant stem cells in medicine production.
Summary questions
1 Describe the difference between
pluripotent and multipotent with regard
to stem cells, and state a source for
both cell types in animals. (4 marks)
2 State where you would find
meristematic tissue in a plant and
explain the importance of the position
of meristematic tissue to a plant.
(5 marks)
4 Alzheimer's is a progressive disease resulting in the loss of
neurones in the brain. An area known as the cerebral cortex is
primarily affected. There is a reduction in the quantity of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine released, which is necessary for
memory and learning. This leads to the symptoms of dementia
such as memory loss, mood swings, and confusion which get
progressively worse over time. At the present time there is no cure
and the few drugs available only temporarily relieve the symptoms.
Parkinson's disease is due to neurones in a part of the brain called
the substantia nigra dying. This leads to a reduction in the amount
of the neurotransmitter dopamine released. The lack of dopamine
leads to loss of the fine control of movement causing shaking,
slowness, and rigidity. There are drugs available which treat the
symptoms effectively but as the disease progresses the increasing
doses needed result in more and more side effects.
a Explain why the use of stem cells is called regenerative
medicine.
(2 marks)
b Evaluate the use of stem cells in the potential treatment
of the two diseases described above.
(5 marks)
3 Evaluate the advantages and
disadvantages of using embryonic
stem cells in medical research.
(4 marks)
142
CELL DIVISION
developmental biology - with their ability to divide indefinitely
and differentiate into almost any cell within an organism, stem
cells have become an important area of study in developmental
biology. This is the study of the changes that occur as multicellular
organisms grow and develop from a single cell, such as a fertilised
egg - and why things sometimes go wrong.
Ethics
Stem cells have been used in medicine for many years in the form of
bone marrow transplants. More recently, the use of embryonic stem
cells in therapies and research has lead to controversy and debates
regarding the ethics of such use.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about ethical
issues surrounding research in
Topic 21.5, Gene technology and
ethics.
The embryos used originally were donated from those left over after
fertility treatment. More recently the law in the UK has changed so
that embryos can be specifically created in the laboratory as a source
of stem cells.
The removal of stem cells from embryos normally results in the
destruction of the embryos, although techniques are being developed
that will allow stem cells to be removed without damage to embryos.
There are not only religious objections to the use of embryos in this
way but moral objections too – many people believe that life begins
at conception and the destruction of embryos is, therefore, murder.
There is a lack of consensus as to when the embryo itself has rights,
and also who owns the genetic material that is being used for research.
This controversy is holding back progress that could lead to the successful
treatment of many incurable diseases. The use of umbilical cord stem
cells overcomes these issues to a large extent, but these cells are merely
multipotent, not pluripotent like embryonic stem cells, thus restricting
their usefulness. Adult tissue stem cells can also be used but they do
not divide as well as umbilical stem cells and are more likely to have
acquired mutations. Developments are being made towards artificially
transforming tissue stem cells into pluripotent cells. Induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) are adult stem cells that have been genetically
modified to act like embryonic stem cells and so are pluripotent.
Synoptic link
You will learn about T cells and B
cells in immunity in Topic 12.6, The
specific immune system.
The use of plant stem cells does not raise the same ethical issues as
animal cells.
Gene therapy using stem cells oo
Children born with the rare genetic condition Severe
Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) are extremely
vulnerable to all infections and without treatment are
unlikely to live for more than a year. They produce no
T cells, and without T cells the B cells do not function
either (T cells and B cells are types of white blood cell).
Normally SCID is treated with a bone marrow transplant,
which depends on finding a matching donor. The
transplanted stem cells divide and differentiate into the
different types of white blood cells needed for a healthy
immune system.
141
