12
ALKANES
journeys in cities, petrol consumption may be 30 miles per gallon (about 4.5 litres). So 10 miles would
use about 1.5 litres of petrol, which will weigh about 1 kg (density of petrol - 0.67 gcm ).
Petrol contains a range of alkanes, roughly n = 5-9, so let's take C,H, (heptane) as typical (M = 100).
Assume complete combustion and room temperature and pressure (RTP).
Step 1: Calculate the amount in moles of C,H, in 1 kg of heptane.
1 kg = 1000 g; M(C2H6) = 100
mass m
amount of C7H16 (
1000 – 10 mol
16) molar mass M. 100
Step 2: Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of heptane.
C,H16(1) + 1102(8) 7002(g) + 8H20(1)
SO, 10 mol
70 mol
Step 3: Rearrange the equation to calculate the volume of CO, produced in the combustion of
1 kg of heptane.
volume V
amount 11 =
molar gas volume V.
V = n XV.
= 70 x 24 = 1680 dm' at room temperature and pressure
That is a lot of co, for a short trip.
Study tip
Reactions of alkanes with halogens
In the presence of sunlight, alkanes react with halogens. The
high-energy ultraviolet (UV) radiation present in sunlight provides
the initial energy for a reaction to take place. For example, methane
reacts with bromine as shown below.
You need only look at reactions of
alkanes with chlorine and bromine.
Fluorine, the most reactive halogen,
is just too reactive and would likely
cause an explosion. Iodine is not
reactive enough and barely reacts
with alkanes.
CH, (g) + Br (1)
methane
CH, Br(g) + HBr(g)
bromomethane
This is a substitution reaction, as a hydrogen atom in the alkane has
been substituted by a halogen atom.
Mechanism for bromination of alkanes
A chemical reaction can often be represented by a series of steps
(the reaction mechanism) showing how electrons are thought to move
during the reaction. The mechanism for the bromination of methane is
an example of radical substitution.
The mechanism takes place in three stages, called initiation,
propagation, and termination.
Synoptic link
Step 1: Initiation
In the initiation stage, the reaction is started when the covalent bond
in a bromine molecule is broken by homolytic fission. Remember
that a covalent bond is a shared pair of electrons. Each bromine atom
See Topic 11.5, Introduction to
reaction mechanisms, for an
introduction into mechanisms and
homolytic fission.
195
12.2 Chemical reactions of the alkanes
Study tip
takes one electron from the pair, forming two highly reactive bromine
radicals. The energy for this bond fission is provided by UV radiation.
Br-Br
Br• + Br
For radical substitution, a description
of the mechanism should include
the equations. However, other
mechanisms use diagrams.
Mechanisms are essential for
understanding how organic
reactions take place.
Remember that a radical is a very reactive species with an unpaired
electron. The radical is shown with a single dot to represent the electron.
Step 2: Propagation
In the propagation stage, the reaction propagates through two
propagation steps, a chain reaction.
Propagation step 1 CHA + Br• - •CH, + HBr
Propagation step 2 CH2 + Br, → CH,Br + Br.
• In the first propagation step, a bromine radical, Br, reacts with a
C-H bond in the methane, forming a methyl radical, •CHz, and a
molecule of hydrogen bromide, HBr.
Study tip
Make sure that the equations are
balanced. Notice that there is
always one radical on each side of
a propagation step. Always show
a dot to indicate the unpaired
electron on a radical.
In the second propagation step, each methyl radical reacts
with another bromine molecule, forming the organic product
bromomethane, CH,Br, together with a new bromine radical (Br.).
The new bromine radical then reacts with another CH, molecule as
in the first propagation step, and the two steps can continue to cycle
through in a chain reaction.
Also note that the first step forms
HBr - it is a common mistake to
show •H forming instead of .CH
In theory the propagation steps could continue until all the reactants
have been used up. In practice propagation is terminated whenever two
radicals collide. It has been estimated that up to a million propagation
cycles take place before a termination step stops the reaction.
Step 3: Termination
In the termination stage, two radicals collide, forming a molecule with
all electrons paired. There are a number of possible termination steps
with different radicals in the reaction mixture.
Br• + BrBr,
•CH, +•CH, CH
CH, + Br → CH,Br
When two radicals collide and react, both radicals are removed from
the reaction mixture, stopping the reaction.
Limitations of radical substitution in organic synthesis
Although radical substitution gives us a way of making haloalkanes,
this reaction has problems that limit its importance for synthesis of just
one organic compound.
Further substitution
In the mechanism above, bromomethane, CH,Br, was formed in the
second propagation step. Another bromine radical can collide with
a bromomethane molecule, substituting a further hydrogen atom to
196
12.2 Chemical reactions of the alkanes
Study tip
You don't need to learn an equation
for each alkane - the equations are
easy to balance. The Cin the alkane
formula gives the number of CO,
molecules formed. And halving the
number of H gives the number of
H,O molecules. Then you just have to
balance the oxygen atoms in 0g.
If you like algebra, the equation below can be used for balancing the
complete combustion of any alkane.
CH,+ (x + 1)0,-XCO, +420
Incomplete combustion of alkanes
In a limited supply of oxygen, there is not enough oxygen for
complete combustion. If you look at the equations above, you
can see that as you descend the homologous series each alkane
molecule (each extra -CH,-) needs an extra 10, molecules for
complete combustion.
When oxygen is limited during combustion, the hydrogen atoms in
the alkane are always oxidised to water, but combustion of the carbon
may be incomplete, forming the toxic gas carbon monoxide (CO) or
even carbon itself as soot. The equations below compare different
degrees of combustion for heptane, a component in petrol.
complete combustion: CO, formed CH 6(1) + 1102(g)
incomplete combustion: CO formed C,H16(1) + 7-02(g)
incomplete combustion: C formed CH 6(1) + 402(g)
→
→
7CO2(g) + 8H2O(1)
7CO(g) + 8H 0(1)
7C(s) + 8H2O(1)
Look at the different amounts of oxygen that are needed for each
equation. It is hardly surprising that it can be difficult to get all of
the carbon to combust when combustion is attempted in a closed
space, such as in a car engine, faulty heating systems, or inadequate
ventilation in living areas.
The silent killer
Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odourless, and highly
toxic gas. It combines irreversibly with haemoglobin in
red blood cells to form a cherry-pink compound called
carboxyhaemoglobin, which prevents the haemoglobin
from transporting oxygen around the body. Severe CO
poisoning will often turn a victim's lips this bright colour.
Che
British Gas
The danger lies in the lack of any odour, so a person can
be poisoned without noticing any danger.
Write equations for the incomplete combustion of
methane.
A Figure 3 An audible carbon monoxide alarm is a
good way to ensure you are immediately alerted to
dangerous levels of carbon monoxide in your home
Synoptic link
To estimate how much CO, is
produced during combustion, we
must refer to the earlier topics on
the mole and quantities in equations
(Chapter 3).
O Worked example: How much CO, is produced
during combustion?
Carbon dioxide production is linked to global warming, but how
much difference does a car journey make? Let's think about a
short trip, a 10-mile journey to a town centre and back. For short
194
12.2 Chemical reactions of the
alkanes
Specification reference: 4.1.2
Reactivity of alkanes
Alkanes do not react with most common reagents. The reasons for
their lack of reactivity are:
• C-C and C-H o-bonds are strong
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the low reactivity of the
o-bonds in alkanes
→ the combustion of alkanes
→ radical substitution in
alkanes.
C—C bonds are non-polar
the electronegativity of carbon and hydrogen is so similar that the
C-H bond can be considered to be non-polar.
Combustion of alkanes
Despite their low reactivity, all alkanes react with a plentiful supply of
oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water. This reaction is called
combustion. All combustion processes give out heat, and alkanes are
used as fuels because they are readily available, easy to transport, and
burn in a plentiful supply oxygen without releasing toxic products.
Synoptic link
You may find looking back at
Topic 6.2, Electronegativity and
polarity useful.
Methane
Methane is a greenhouse gas with a global warming potential of 22
(meaning that it has 22 times the warming effect of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere). Vast quantities of methane are stored in the ice-saturated
arctic tundra of Siberia and northern Canada. Global warming is very likely
to thaw the tundra, releasing this methane into the atmosphere and greatly
increasing global warming.
The methane locked into the frozen earth of the tundra was formed by the
decomposition of organic material in the absence of oxygen. The same
chemistry lies behind the production of biogas, methane made as a fuel
from organic waste or plant material.
Figure 1 Methane is the main
component of the natural gas used for
cooking, heating, and the generation of
electricity. Natural gas typically contains
about 80% methane, with varying
proportions of ethane, propane, and butane
If methane is such a powerful greenhouse gas, why could the production
of biogas help to slow down global warming?
Complete combustion of alkanes
In a plentiful supply of oxygen, alkanes burn completely to produce
carbon dioxide and water. The reactions below show the complete
combustion of four alkanes
methane, as natural gas: CH,(g) + 202(g) + CO2(g) + 2H20(1)
ethane
C,H,(g) + 3402(g) → 2C02() + 3H,0(1)
propane
C,H,(8) + 502(g) + 3C02(g) + 4H20(1)
hexane, in petrol: CH 4(1) + 9 02(g) → 6C02(g) + 7H20(1)
A Figure 2 The Arctic Tundra in
Greenland. Global warming is threatening
to melt the permafrost releasing trapped
carbon dioxide and methane
193
ALKANES
12
10 a
(ii) Name one of the structural isomers
of C, H, Br, formed in the reaction
between cyclohexane and bromine.
(1 mark)
OCR F322 June 14 QI
Methane reacts with IBr to form many
products. Two of these products are
iodomethane and hydrogen bromide.
(i) Suggest the essential condition
needed for this reaction. (1 mark)
(ii) The mechanism of the reaction
involves three steps, one of which
is called termination. Describe the
mechanism of the reaction that forms
iodomethane and hydrogen bromide.
Include in your answer:
the name of the mechanism
the names for the other two steps of
the mechanism
equations for these two steps of the
mechanism
the type of bond fission
• one equation for a termination step.
Your answer should link the named steps
to the relevant equations.
(7 marks)
12 Petrol and camping gas are examples of fuels
that contain hydrocarbons.
a Petrol is a mixture of alkanes containing
6 to 10 carbon atoms per molecule. Some
of these alkanes are structural isomers of
one another.
(i) Explain the term structural isomers.
(1 mark)
(ii) State the molecular formula of an
alkane present in petrol. (1 mark)
b The major hydrocarbon in camping gas
is butane. Some camping gas was reacted
with chlorine to form a mixture of
structural isomers.
(i) What conditions are required for this
reaction to take place? (1 mark)
(ii) Two structural isomers, A and B,
were separated from this mixture.
These isomers had a molar mass of
92.5 g mol-!
Deduce the molecular formula of
these two isomers.
(1 mark)
(iii) Draw the displayed formulae of
A and B and name each compound.
(2 marks)
13 Octane, C.Hg, is one of the alkanes present
in petrol.
a What is the general formula for an
alkane?
(1 mark)
b Carbon monoxide, Co, is formed during
the incomplete combustion of octane.
(i) Write an equation for the incomplete
combustion of octane, forming
carbon monoxide and water. (1 mark)
(ii) Why does incomplete combustion
sometimes take place? (1 mark)
C 22.8 g of octane undergoes complete
combustion. Calculate the volume of
oxygen, at RTP, required for complete
combustion and incomplete combustion.
(3 marks)
OCR F322 June 2013 Q4(b)
11 The reaction between butane and chlorine is
an example of radical substitution. Initially,
chlorobutane, C,H,Cl, is formed, which then
reacts with more chlorine to form C,H.CI,
a The first step of the reaction of C,H, CI
with chlorine is the homolytic fission of a
chlorine molecule.
What is meant by the term homolytic
fission?
(1 mark)
b Complete the missing species in the
propagation steps below.
Cl• + C,H,Cl → ........... + ...........
...... + ............. → C,H,Cl2 + ...........
(2 marks)
c Butane, C,H, undergoes incomplete
combustion when there is a shortage
of oxygen. Write an equation for the
incomplete combustion of butane.
(1 mark)
OCR F322 Jan 2013 Q1(a) (b)(c) (d)
199
12
ALKANES
12.1 Properties of the alkanes
Specification reference: 4.1.2
What are alkanes?
Alkanes are the main components of natural gas and crude oil.
They are amongst the most stable organic compounds, and their lack
of reactivity has allowed crude oil deposits to remain in the Earth for
many millions of years.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ alkanes as saturated
hydrocarbons
→ bonding in alkanes
→ shapes and bond angles of
alkanes
► variations in the boiling
points of alkanes.
Alkanes are mainly used as fuels, exploiting their reaction with
oxygen to generate heat.
The alkanes in Table 1 show the general formula C,H,2 - doubling
the carbon and adding two gives the hydrogen number.
Table 1 lists some of the alkanes used in everyday life.
Table 1 Common uses of the
first twenty members of the alkane
homologous series
gas, used in domestic fuel
CH4, C3Hg, CH10
petrol, used in cars
C6H12-CH20
kerosene, used in aircraft
C10H22-C16H34
diesel, used in cars and lorries
C2H26-C20H42
Properties of alkanes
The bonding in alkanes
Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons, containing only carbon and
hydrogen atoms joined together by single covalent bonds.
Each carbon atom in an alkane is joined to four other atoms by
single covalent bonds. These are a type of covalent bond called a
sigma bond (o-bond).
A covalent bond is defined as a shared pair of electrons. A o-bond is
the result of the overlap of two orbitals, one from each bonding atom.
Each overlapping orbital contains one electron, so the o-bond has two
electrons that are shared between the bonding atoms. A o-bond is
positioned on a line directly between bonding atoms.
Each carbon atom in an alkane has four sigma bonds, either C-C or
C-H. Figure 1 shows the electron density of a g-bond between two
carbon atoms.
Synoptic link
You were introduced to the names
and formula of the first 10 alkanes in
Topic 11.2, Nomenclature of organic
compounds. Make sure you learn
these as alkanes form the basis for
naming all organic compounds.
A Figure 1 o-bond between two carbon atoms.
Synoptic link
Look back at Topic 6.1, Shapes
of molecules and ions, to remind
yourself how the shapes of
molecules depends on electron
pair repulsion and what a
tetrahedral geometry looks like.
The shape of alkanes
Each carbon atom is surrounded by four electron pairs in four
o-bonds. Repulsion between these electron pairs results in a 3D
tetrahedral arrangement around each carbon atom. Each bond
angle is approximately 109.5º.
Figure 2 shows the 3D shapes of the first four alkanes. Each formula
matches the general formula of C H+. The o-bonds act as axes
around which the atoms can rotate freely, so these shapes are not
rigid, for example, butane is shown in a zigzag in Figure 2, but it can
also rotate into a U shape.
190
12.1 Properties of the alkanes
Effect of branching on boiling point
Isomers of alkanes have the same molecular mass. If you compare the
boiling points of branched isomers with straight-chain isomers, you
find that the branched isomers have lower boiling points.
Table 3 shows the boiling points for the isomers of pentane, C.H.
Table 3 The skeletal formulae and boiling points of the structural isomers of CH2
Name
pentane
2-methylbutane 2,2-dimethylpropane
Skeletal formula
Boiling point/°C
36
28
2,2-dimethylpropane is a gas at room temperature, 2-methylbutane
would only be a gas on a warm day, and at normal UK temperatures
pentane is a liquid.
The reason for this difference lies again with London forces. There are
fewer surface points of contact between molecules of the branched
alkanes, giving fewer London forces. Another factor lies with the
shape of the molecules. The branches get in the way and prevent
the branched molecules getting as close together as straight-chain
molecules, decreasing the intermolecular forces further. It is easy to
picture this difference by looking at the skeletal formulae in Figure 6.
more branching
less surface area of contact
weaker London forces
Figure 5 The effect of branching on the boiling points of alkanes
Summary questions
1 Kerosene is obtained from crude oil. Name the process used to obtain
kerosene from crude oil and explain how the process works. (2 marks)
ce
DS
2 Explain why the straight-chain isomer of C, H, has a higher boiling
point than any of its branched-chain structural isomers. (2 marks)
3 Explain why the boiling points increase down the alkane
homologous series.
(2 marks)
4 Describe the bonding in ethane. State and explain the H-C-H bond
angle in a molecule of ethane.
(4 marks)
192
12
ALKANES
109.5°
C3Hg
C4H10
CH4
CyH6
A Figure 2 Shapes of methane, ethane, propane, and butane
Variations in the boiling points of alkanes
Crude oil contains hundreds of different alkanes. Oil refineries
separate the crude oil into fractions by fractional distillation in a
distillation tower (Figure 3). Each fraction contains a range of alkanes.
Separation like this is possible because the boiling points of the alkanes
are different, increasing as their chain length increases. Table 2 shows
the boiling points of the first ten alkanes.
Study tip
When drawing 3D shapes, you
will need to use solid wedges and
dashed wedges. This is how ethane
is drawn using wedges.
I
I
Table 2 The boiling points of the first ten members of the alkane homologous series
Alkane
CHACHE CHE CHOCHEZ CHA CHE CHE CHzo Couzz
Boiling point/°C
-164
-89
-42
36
69
98
126
151
174
Synoptic link
Why does the boiling point increase? The answer lies with the
weak intermolecular forces called London forces. These forces
hold molecules together in solids and liquids but, once broken, the
molecules move apart from each other and the alkane becomes a gas.
The greater the intermolecular forces, the higher the boiling point.
You learned about London forces
and the factors affecting their size
in Topic 6.3, Intermolecular forces.
Effect of chain length on boiling point
London forces act between molecules that are in close surface contact.
As the chain length increases, the molecules have a larger surface area,
so more surface contact is possible between molecules. The London
forces between the molecules will be greater and so more energy is
required to overcome the forces.
Figure 4 shows how the surface contact increases with increasing
chain length, illustrated with skeletal formulae.
increased chain length
A Figure 3 A distillation tower in which
crude oil is separated into fractions.
The oil is heated to about 400°C.
Hydrocarbon gases rise upwards and
condense at different levels depending
on their boiling points
greater surface area of contact
stronger London forces
Figure 4 The effect of increasing chain length on the boiling points of alkanes
191
Chapter 12 Practice questions
7
I Calculate the volume of carbon dioxide
produced at RTP.
(2 marks)
Explain why the boiling points of the alkanes
increase with the number of carbon atoms
in the chain.
(3 marks)
Some of the hydrocarbons in kerosene have
the formula C H22:
(i) What is the name of the straight
chain hydrocarbon with the formula
C10H222
(1 mark)
(ii) Draw the skeletal formula of one
branched chain isomer with the
formula C H
(1 mark)
(iii) Explain why the straight chain
isomer of C, H,, has a higher boiling
point than any of its branched chain
structural isomers.
(2 marks)
OCR F322 Jan 2010 QI
In the presence of ultraviolet radiation,
cyclohexane reacts with bromine.
a A mixture of cyclic organic compounds is
formed, including C,H, Br.
(i) Copy and complete the table below to
show the mechanism of the reaction
between bromine and cyclohexane to
form CH Br.
Include all possible equations in your
answer.
Practice questions
1 What do you understand by the term
saturated hydrocarbon.
mark)
2 Name the following compounds
a CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH, (1 mark)
b CH,CH,CH(CH3)CH,
(1 mark)
C CH,C(CH2)2CH2CH
(1 mark)
In each of the following pairs, predict which
of the following alkanes has the higher boiling
point. In each case explain your answer.
a hexane and 3-methylpentane. (2 marks)
b 2-methyloctane and 2,2-dimethylheptane
(2 marks)
c hexane and pentane
(2 marks)
4 Bromine will react in a similar way as
chlorine with methane.
a Write an equation for the reaction of
bromine with methane.
(1 mark)
b The first step in the mechanism is the
breaking of the Br-Br bond.
State the conditions required for this
process to occur.
Write an equation for this step and state
the type of bond fission taking place.
(3 marks)
c Pentane reacts with chlorine to form a
mixture of monochlorinated alkanes.
How many monochlorinated isomers
can be formed in this reaction? (1 mark)
5 Write equations for the combustion of
nonane in
a a plentiful supply of oxygen (1 mark)
b a limited supply of oxygen (1 mark)
1.45g of butane combusts in a plentiful
supply of oxygen to form carbon dioxide and
water.
a Write a balanced equation for the
complete combustion of
butane (C4H10)
(1 mark)
b Calculate the amount, in moles,
in 1.45g of butane.
(1 mark)
C Calculate the volume of oxygen
required for complete combustion
of 1.45g of butane at RTP. (2 marks)
9
Step
Equation(s)
Initiation
Propagation
Termination
(5 marks)
(ii) The initiation step involves homolytic
fission.
Explain why the initiation step is an
example of homolytic fission.(1 mark)
b
The reaction between cyclohexane and
bromine also forms C.H.Brą.
(i) Write an equation, using molecular
formulae, for the reaction of
cyclohexane and bromine in the
presence of ultraviolet radiation to
form CH.Br.
(1 mark)
198
12
ALKANES
form dibromomoethane, CH,Br,. Further substitution can continue
until all hydrogen atoms have been substituted. The result is a mixture
of CH,Br, CH,Bry, CHBrz, and CBry
+Br2
+Br,
+Br,
+Br,
CH, - CH,Br - CH,Br, - CHBr- CBr.
-HBr
- HBr
-HBr
-HBr
Substitution at different positions in a carbon chain
For methane, all four hydrogen atoms are bonded to the same carbon
atom, so only one monobromo compound, CH,Br, is possible. With
ethane, similarly, only one monosubstituted product, C,H,Br, is
possible.
HBr
If the carbon chain is longer, we will get a mixture of monosubstituted
isomers by substitution at different positions in the carbon chain. For
example, pentane could form three monosubstituted isomers (Figure 4).
H—
C—C—Br
HH
Br
Br
H—
C—
C—
H
Br
H
H
Figure 4 Isomers of bromopentane: different possible monosubstituted bromo
compounds from substitution of pentane with bromine.
A Figure 3 Isomers of dibromoethane:
different possible disubstituted bromo
compounds from substitution of ethane
With further substitution, there are even more possibilities, as shown
in Figure 3 for ethane, which can form two different dibromo isomers.
Summary questions
1 Write equations for the complete and incomplete combustion
of dodecane, the alkane with 12 carbon atoms.
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
2 Explain why the alkanes do not react with common
laboratory reagents.
3 Write the equation for the incomplete combustion of
3-methylpentane.
(2 marks)
4 Write an equation for the reaction between propane and bromine
to form a monosubstituted product.
(1 mark)
5 Show the mechanism for the reaction between ethane and
chlorine to form a monosubstituted product.
(5 marks)
6 For propane, write equations for the two propagation steps that
convert C.H.Clinto C,HCly.
(2 marks)
197
