8.2 The halogens
Specification reference: 3.1.3
Characteristic physical properties
The halogens, Group 17 (7) of the periodic table, are the most reactive
non-metallic group. The elements do not occur in their elemental
form in nature. On Earth, the halogens occur as stable halide ions
(Cl, Br, and I ) dissolved in sea water or combined with sodium or
potassium as solid deposits, such as in salt mines containing common
salt, Naci.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ characteristic physical
properties of halogens
→ redox reactions and reactivity
of halogens
→ the trend in reactivity of the
halogens Cl, Brą, and Iz
► disproportionation
► the use of chlorine in water
purification and bleach.
DE DO
Trends in boiling points
At room temperature and pressure (RTP), all the halogens exist as
diatomic molecules, X,. The group contains elements in all three
physical states at RTP, changing from gas to liquid to solid down the
group (Figure 1). In their solid states the halogens form lattices with
simple molecular structures. Table I explains the trend in boiling
points of the five halogens – fluorine to astatine.
Synoptic link
For more details about simple
molecular structures and induced
dipole-dipole interactions
(London forces) look back at
Topic 6.3, Intermolecular forces.
Figure 1 Chlorine is a pale green
gas at RTP. Bromine liquid is extremely
toxic, and vaporises readily at room
temperature, as can be seen from the
orange gas above the red-brown liquid.
lodine is a solid with grey-black crystals
Table 1 Boiling points of the halogen. Astatine only exists as short-lived isotopes and its boiling point has been estimated from
the group trend
Halogen
molecule
Number of
electrons
Boiling
point/°C
Appearance and state at RTP
Trend
F
18
-188
pale yellow gas
34
-34
pale green gas
70
red-brown liquid
more electrons
stronger London forces
more energy required to break
the intermolecular forces
boiling point increases
59
184
230
106
shiny grey-black solid
170
never been seen
Redox reactions and reactivity of halogens
Redox reactions
Each halogen has seven outer-shell electrons, just one electron short
of the electronic configuration of a noble gas. Two electrons are in the
outer s sub-shell and five in the outer p sub-shell - s2p.
112
8.3 Qualitative analysis
Halide tests
Most halides are soluble in water, but silver halides are insoluble.
Aqueous silver ions react with aqueous halide ions to form precipitates
of silver halides, as shown by the general equation below. X-(aq)
represents an aqueous solution of any halide.
Agt(aq) + X-(aq) → AgX(s)
This reaction forms the basis for a halide test, which was briefly
introduced in Topic 8.2, The halogens.
1
2
Add aqueous silver nitrate, AgNO3, to an aqueous solution
of a halide.
The silver halide precipitates are different colours - silver chloride
is white, silver bromide is cream-coloured, and silver iodide is
yellow (Figure 3).
Add aqueous ammonia to test the solubility of the precipitate. This
stage is very useful because the three precipitate colours can be
difficult to tell apart.
A Figure 3 From left to right, the test tubes contain - a precipitate of silver chloride,
silver chloride after addition of dilute aqueous ammonia, a precipitate of silver
bromide, silver bromide after addition of concentrated aqueous ammonia, a precipitate
of silver iodide, and silver iodide after addition of concentrated aqueous ammonia,
which fails to dissolve the silver iodide precipitate
The reactions with Ag+ (aq) ions and the solubilities of the silver halide
precipitates in aqueous ammonia are summarised in Table 1.
Table 1 Halide tests using aqueous silver ions, Ag+ (aq)
Halide
Colour of precipitate
Solubility in NH, (aq)
chloride, CI-
white
soluble in dilute
lonic equation
Ag+ (aq) + CI+(aq) → AgCl(s)
Ag+ (aq) + Br (aq) → AgBr(s)
Ag+ (aq) + (aq) → Agl(s)
bromide, Br
cream
soluble in conc
iodide,
yellow
insoluble in con
118
8.3 Qualitative analysis
Specification reference: 3.1.4
Qualitative analysis of ions
You have already learned about titration as a quantitative analysis
technique (a technique with numerical results). Qualitative analysis
relies on simple observations rather than measurements, and can often
be carried out quickly on a test-tube scale. The observations may be
gas bubbles, precipitates, colour changes, or identification of gases.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ qualitative analysis of ions
→ test-tube tests
analysing unknown
compounds.
Tests for anions
Tests based on gases
Carbonate test
Carbonates react with acids to form carbon dioxide gas. The
equation below shows the reaction of dilute nitric acid with
aqueous sodium carbonate.
Synoptic link
All carbonates react with acids
in a similar way, as described
in Topic 4.1, Acids, bases, and
neutralisation.
NaCO3(aq) + 2HNO3(aq) + 2NaNO3(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
This reaction forms the basis for a test for the carbonate ion, CO2-
1
2
3
In a test tube, add dilute nitric acid to the solid or solution to be
tested.
If you see bubbles, the unknown compound could be a carbonate.
To prove that the gas is carbon dioxide, use the test that you will
remember from GCSE.
• Bubble the gas through lime water - a saturated aqueous
solution of calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH),.
Carbon dioxide reacts to form a fine white precipitate of calcium
carbonate, which turns the lime water cloudy (milky) (Figure 1).
CO2(g) + Ca(OH)2(aq) → CaCO3(s) + H20(1)
A Figure 1 Lime water test for carbon
dioxide
Tests based on precipitates
Sulfate test
Most sulfates are soluble in water, but barium sulfate, BaSO, is very
insoluble. The formation of a white precipitate of barium sulfate is
the basis for the sulfate test, in which aqueous barium ions are added
to a solution of an unknown compound. The ionic equation
is shown below.
Ba2+(aq) + S0,-(aq) + BaSO4(s)
Usually the Ba2+(aq) ions are added as aqueous barium chloride or
barium nitrate. If you intend to carry out a halide test afterwards, use
barium nitrate – with barium chloride, you are introducing chloride
ions to your solution.
A Figure 2 A dense white precipitate
forms when Ba2+ (aq) ions are added
to a solution containing sulfate ions,
50 -- the heavy precipitate of Baso
sinks to the bottom of the test tube
117
REACTIVITY TRENDS
Synoptic link
Group 2 compounds in medicine
Group 2 bases are often used as antacids for treating acid indigestion.
Many indigestion tablets use magnesium and calcium carbonates as
the main ingredients, whilst 'milk of magnesia' is a suspension of
white magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH),, in water. Remember that
magnesium hydroxide is only very slightly soluble in water.
If you are unsure about
neutralisation reactions look back
at Topic 4.1, Acids, bases, and
neutralisation.
The acid in your stomach is mainly hydrochloric acid and the
equations below show the neutralisation reactions that take place with
Mg(OH), and Caco.
Mg(OH)2(s) + 2HCl(aq) —MgCl, (aq) + 2H,0(1)
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) +CaCl2 (aq) + H2O(1) + CO2(g)
e 600ml Dom
TOS E
BAYER
(um<Po
GAVISCON
Rennie
ORIGINAL ANISEED
RELIEF
Oral Suspension
PEPPERMINT
Sodium alginate
Sodium bicarbonate
Calcium carbonate
Heartbum & Indigestion
Lasts up to 4 hours o
72
tablets
Calcium Carbonate,
Magnesium Carbonate
Fast effective relief from
indigestion and heartburn
Figure 6 Common indigestion remedies made with Group 2 compounds, such as
calcium carbonate, CaCO.
Summary questions
1 Explain why Group 2 elements are reducing agents.
(2 marks)
2 The following reaction is a redox process: Mg + 2HCI - MgCl, + H,
a Identify the changes in oxidation number.
(2 marks)
b State which species is being oxidised and which is being reduced.
(1 mark)
3 Explain why the Group 2 elements become more reactive down
the group
(4 marks)
4 State and explain the trend in alkalinity of the solution formed when
Group 2 oxides are added to water.
(3 marks)
111
REACTIVITY TRENDS
A barium meal - making use
of precipitation reactions
You may have heard of barium meals - not some kind of food, but an
application of precipitation in medicine.
Barium meals are used to enable doctors to see the outline of the gullet,
stomach, and upper small intestine in order to identify abnormalities such
as ulcers or tumours. The patient swallows water that has been shaken with
barium sulfate, the insoluble compound that forms during the sulfate test.
The white precipitate coats the inner lining of the gut. An X-ray image is then
taken that displays the barium sulfate coating the gut.
Barium ions in solution are extremely toxic. Why are patients not poisoned
by this treatment?
A Figure 4 X-ray image of a patient who
has taken a barium meal to coat the upper
gastrointestinal tract with barium sulfate,
which shows up white in the picture
Sequence of tests
If you are asked to analyse an unknown inorganic compound,
you will need to carry out the tests for anions in the correct order.
Otherwise you could obtain confusing results and make an incorrect
identification. For anions, the correct order for tests is:
1 carbonate, CO2-
2 sulfate, So,
3 halides, Cl-, Br, and I
Why is there a correct order?
To understand the reasons behind the correct order, you need to think
about the chemistry involved in each test.
Carbonate test
In the carbonate test, you add a dilute acid and are looking for
effervescence from carbon dioxide gas.
Neither sulfate nor halide ions produce bubbles with dilute acid. The
carbonate test can be carried out without the possibility of an incorrect
conclusion. If the test produces no bubbles, then no carbonate is
present and you can proceed to the next test.
Sulfate test
In the sulfate test, you add a solution containing Ba2+(aq) ions and are
looking for a white precipitate of BaSO4(s).
Barium carbonate, Baco, is white and insoluble in water. So if you
carry out a sulfate test on a carbonate, you will get a white precipitate
too. Therefore it is important to carry out the carbonate test first and only
proceed to the sulfate test when you know that no carbonate is present.
Halide test
In the halide test, you add a solution containing Agt(aq) ions, as
AgNO,(aq), and are looking for a precipitate.
119
REACTIVITY TRENDS
Redox reactions are the most common type of reaction of the
halogens. Each halogen atom is reduced, gaining one electron to form
a l-halide ion with the electron configuration of the nearest noble
gas (see Table 2).
Cl2 + 2e → 2Cl chlorine is reduced
Table 2 Comparison of outer-shell
electron configurations of halogen
atoms and halide ions
Halogen atom Halide ion
F 2s22p5
2s22p6
CI 3s 3p5 Cl 3s23p
Br 4s24p5
4s24p6
5s25p5
5s-5p6
At 6s6p5 At 6s-6p
Another species loses electrons to halogen atoms - it is oxidised.
The halogen is called an oxidising agent because it has oxidised
another species.
Br-
Halogen-halide displacement reactions
Displacement reactions of halogens with halide ions can be carried out
on a test-tube scale. The results of the displacement reactions show
that the reactivity of the halogens decreases down the group.
V Table 3 Halogen solutions in water
and cyclohexane
Cl2
A solution of each halogen is added to aqueous solutions of the other
halides. For example, a solution of chlorine (Cl) is added to two
aqueous solutions containing bromine (Br) and iodine (I") ions. If the
halogen added is more reactive than the halide present
Brąz
solution in water
pale green
orange
brown
a reaction takes place, the halogen displacing the halide from
solution
the solution changes colour.
.
solution in cyclohexane (top layer)
Solutions of iodine and bromine in water can appear a similar orange-
brown colour, depending on the concentration. To tell them apart,
an organic non-polar solvent such as cyclohexane can be added and
the mixture shaken. The non-polar halogens dissolve more readily
in cyclohexane than in water. In cyclohexane their colours are much
easier to tell apart, with iodine being a deep violet. The colours are
shown in Table 3.
pale green
orange
violet
The results and conclusions for these displacement reactions of
aqueous solution of halogens and halides are shown in Table 4.
Table 4 Halogen displacement reactions
_
Cl(aq)
Br2(aq)
12(aq)
Halogen
Cl(aq)
no reaction
no reaction
Br (aq)
no reaction
orange colour from Br, formation
C12(aq) + 2Br (aq) → 2C1- (aq) + Br_(aq)
violet colour from l, formation
Cl(aq) + 21- (aq) - 2014(aq) + 12(aq)
1-(aq)
violet colour from 1, formation
Br, (aq) + 21- (aq) - 2Br (aq) + 1, (aq)
From the results:
chlorine has clearly reacted with both Br and I-
bromine has reacted with I only
iodine has not reacted at all.
113
8.2 The halogens
Synoptic link
Reaction of chlorine with bromide ions
The equation and oxidation number changes are shown in full for
the redox reaction between aqueous solutions of chlorine and
sodium bromide.
If you are unsure about redox
reactions and oxidation numbers,
look back at Topic 4.3, Redox.
full equation
ionic equation
Cl(aq) + 2NaBr(aq) + 2NaCl(aq) + Br_(aq)
C1,(aq) + 2Br (aq) – 2C1- (aq) + Br,(aq)
-1
reduction
-1 →
0 oxidation
chlorine
most reactive
bromine
2 Br in 2Br
each Br increases by +1
each Cl decreases by - 1
total increase = +2
total decrease = -2
lodine
least reactive
2 Cl in Cl,
A Figure 2 The order of reactivity
of chlorine, bromine, and iodine
Figure 2 shows the order of reactivity of the three halogens chlorine,
bromine, and iodine.
What about fluorine and astatine?
Fluorine is a pale yellow gas, reacting with almost any substance that
it comes in contact with.
Astatine is extremely rare because it is radioactive and decays rapidly,
and the element has never actually been seen. It is predicted to be the
least reactive halogen.
Trend in reactivity
In redox reactions, halogens react by gaining electrons. Down the
group, the tendency to gain an electron decreases and the halogens
become less reactive (Table 5).
Table 5 Trend in reactivity of the halogens
Trend
Halogen
molecule
Atomic Number of
radius inner shells
•
Atomic radius increases
More inner shells so shielding
increases
Less nuclear attraction to capture
an electron from another species
Reactivity decreases
In the halogens, fluorine is the strongest oxidising agent, gaining
electrons from other species more readily than the other halogens. The
halogens become weaker oxidising agents down the group.
Disproportionation
Disproportionation is a redox reaction in which the same element
is both oxidised and reduced. The reaction of chlorine with water
and with cold, dilute sodium hydroxide are two examples of
disproportionation reactions.
114
8.3 Qualitative analysis
Silver carbonate, Ag, CO, and silver sulfate, Ag, SO4, are both
insoluble in water and will form as precipitates in this test. It is
therefore important to carry out the halide test last, after carrying out
carbonate and sulfate tests to rule out those possibilities.
What about a mixture of ions?
If you are asked to analyse a mixture of chemicals, you carry out the
tests in the same sequence and on the same solution.
1 Carbonate test
If you see bubbles, continue adding dilute nitric acid until the
bubbling stops.
• All carbonate ions will then have been removed and there will be
none left to react in the next tests.
If you intend to test for sulfate or halide ions, it is important to use
dilute nitric acid, HNO, for this test. Sulfuric acid contains sulfate ions
and hydrochloric acid contains chloride ions, which will show up in
the sulfate and halide tests.
2 Sulfate test
• To the solution left from the carbonate test, add an excess of
Ba(NO3)(aq).
Any sulfate ions present will precipitate out as barium sulfate.
• Filter the solution to remove the barium sulfate.
If you intend to test for halide ions, it is important not to use
BaCl,(aq), because the chloride ions will show up in the halide test.
3 Halide test
To the solution left from the sulfate test, add AgNO3(aq).
Any carbonate or sulfate ions initially present have already been
removed. Therefore any precipitate formed must involve halide ions.
• Add NH, (aq) to confirm which halide you have.
Summary questions
1 How could you distinguish
between NaCl, NaBr, and Nal
by a simple test? (3 marks)
Tests for cations
Test for ammonium ion, NH +
When heated together, aqueous ammonium ions and aqueous
hydroxide ions react to form ammonia gas, NH.
NH,+ (aq) + OH(aq) + NH3(g) + H2O(1)
2 Explain why it is important to
carry out the carbonate test
before carrying out a sulfate
test on an unknown chemical.
(2 marks)
This reaction forms the basis for a test of the ammonium ion.
3 Explain why, if you are testing
a mixture, it is important to
use dilute nitric acid, rather
than sulfuric or hydrochloric
acid, for the carbonate test?
(2 marks)
Aqueous sodium hydroxide, NaOH, is added to a solution of an
ammonium ion.
Ammonia gas is produced. You are unlikely to see gas bubbles as
ammonia is very soluble in water.
The mixture is warmed and ammonia gas is released.
You may be able to smell the ammonia, but it is easy to test the
gas with moist pH indicator paper. Ammonia is alkaline and its
presence will turn the paper blue.
3
120
8.1 Group 2
Although other energy changes take place when Group 2 elements
react, the first and second ionisation energies make up most of the
energy input. From Figure 4, it is clear that the total energy input from
ionisation energies to form 2+ ions decreases down the group.
The Group 2 elements become more reactive and stronger reducing
agents down the group.
Reactions of Group 2 compounds
Group 2 oxides
Reactions with water
The oxides of Group 2 elements react with water, releasing hydroxide
ions, OH®, and forming alkaline solutions of the metal hydroxide.
CaO(s) + H,O(1) Ca2+(aq) + 2OH- (aq)
The Group 2 hydroxides are only slightly soluble in water. When the
solution becomes saturated, any further metal and hydroxide ions will
form a solid precipitate:
Ca2+ (aq) + 2OH(aq) —
Ca(OH),(s)
Solubility of hydroxides
The solubility of the hydroxides in water increases down the group, so the
resulting solutions contain more OH(aq) ions and are more alkaline.
Table 2 Trend in alkalinity
Hydroxide
Trend
Mg(OH),(s) is only very slightly soluble in water.
The solution has a low OH-(aq) concentration and a pH - 10.
Ba(OH),(s) is much more soluble in water.
The solution has a greater OH-(aq) concentration and a pH - 13.
The trend is shown in Table 2.
solubility
increases
PH
You can easily show this trend by carrying out the following experiment.
Mg(OH)2
Ca(OH)2
Sr(OH)2
Ba(OH)2
increases
alkalinity
increases
1 Add a spatula of each Group 2 oxide to water in a test tube.
Shake the mixture. On this scale, there is insufficient water to
dissolve all of the metal hydroxide that forms. You will have a
saturated solution of each metal hydroxide with some white solid
undissolved at the bottom of the test-tube.
3 Measure the pH of each solution. The alkalinity will be seen to
increase down the group.
Uses of Group 2 compounds as bases
The Group 2 oxides, hydroxides, and carbonates have many uses
related to their basic properties and ability to neutralise acids.
Group 2 compounds in agriculture
Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH), is added to fields as lime by farmers
to increase the pH of acidic soils. You may have seen the white lime
powder on fields (Figure 5). The calcium hydroxide neutralises acid in
the soil, forming neutral water:
Ca(OH),(s) + 2H+ (aq) → Ca2+(aq) + 2H20(1)
A Figure 5 Spreading lime (Ca(OH)2)
on a field to reduce soil acidity
110
REACTIVITY TRENDS
Redox reactions with water
The Group 2 elements react with water to form an alkaline hydroxide,
with the general formula M(OH),, and hydrogen gas. Water and
magnesium react very slowly, but the reaction becomes more and
more vigorous with metals further down the group - reactivity
increases down the group.
least reactive
Sr(s) + 2H2O(l)
→ Sr(OH)2(aq) + H2(g)
→ +2
oxidation
reduction
+1
0
Not all the hydrogen atoms are reduced:
Rn
most reactive
A Figure 2 The reactivity of Group 2
elements
• l Sr in Sr
• 4 H in 2H,0
Sr increases by 2
total increase = +2
two H decrease by 1 forming H, total decrease = -2
two H do not change forming Sr(OH),
Redox reactions with dilute acids
Many metals take part in redox reactions with dilute acids to form a
salt and hydrogen gas.
metal + acid salt + hydrogen
All Group 2 elements react in this way. Again, the reactivity increases
down the group.
Figure 2 shows the reaction of magnesium with dilute hydrochloric acid.
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl,(aq) + H2(g)
oxidation
reduction
Figure 3 Magnesium ribbon reacts
with dilute hydrochloric acid to give off
tiny bubbles of hydrogen
11
+1 –
0
The total changes in oxidation number balance:
1 Mg in Mg Mg increases by 2
2 H in 2HCl each H decreases by 1
total increase = +2
total decrease = -2
Synoptic link
You can review ionisation energies
in Topic 7.2, lonisation energy.
Trend in reactivity and ionisation energy
When the redox reactions above are carried out with each Group 2
element, the reactivity increases down Group 2 (Figure 2).
1st
2nd
So why does the reactivity increase?
The atoms of Group 2 elements react by losing electrons to form
+2 ions. The formation of +2 ions from gaseous atoms requires the
input of two ionisation energies:
• M(g) → M*(g) + e
first ionisation energy
M+(g) → MP+(g) + e
second ionisation energy
Element
foos
1500
2000
2500
3000+
Figure 4 shows the first and second ionisation energies for the Group 2
elements. The ionisation energies decrease down the group because
the attraction between the nucleus and the outer electrons decreases
as a result of increasing atomic radius and increasing shielding.
lonisation energy/kJ mol-1
A Figure 4 First and second ionisation
energies of Group 2 elements
109
REACTIVITY TRENDS
8
6. This question is about properties of the
halogens
a Describe and explain the trend in boiling
points in the halogens.
(4 marks)
b Bromine reacts with calcium to form an
ionic compound.
State the electron configuration, in terms
of sub-shells, for:
(i) Ca and Br atoms.
(2 marks)
(ii) the ions formed in the reaction.
(2 marks)
c Iodine and strontium are reacted together.
Explain why it is difficult to predict
whether this reaction is more or less
reactive than the reaction of bromine
with calcium.
(3 marks)
7. The Group 2 element barium, Ba, is silvery
white when pure but blackens when exposed
to air. The blackening is due to the formation
of both barium oxide and barium nitride. The
nitride ion is N3-
a Predict the formula of:
(i) barium oxide
(ii) barium nitride
(2 marks)
A 0.11g sample of pure barium was added
to 100 cm of water.
Ba(s) + 2H20(1) - Ba(OH)2(aq) + H2(g)
(i) Show that 8.0 x 10-4 mol of Ba were
added to the water.
(1 mark)
(ii) Calculate the volume of hydrogen, in
cm, produced at room temperature
and pressure.
(1 mark)
(iii) Calculate the concentration, in
mol dm-, of the Ba(OH),(aq)
solution formed.
(1 mark)
(iv) State the approximate pH of the
Ba(OH),(aq) solution. (1 mark)
C A student repeated the experiment in
(b) using a 0.11g sample of barium that had
blackened following exposure to the air.
Suggest why the volume of hydrogen
produced would be slightly less than the
volume collected using pure barium.
(1 mark)
d Describe and explain the trend, down the
group, in the reactivity of the Group 2
elements with water.
(5 marks)
F321 June 2009 05
A student is provided with a solution
containing two different sodium compounds.
The student carries out the series of tests
below on the mixture.
Test 1 Add dilute nitric acid.
Observation: Effervescence.
Test 2 Add aqueous barium nitrate to the
resulting mixture. If a precipitate
forms, filter off the precipitate before
carrying out Test 3.
Observation: No observable change
Test 3 Add aqueous silver nitrate
Observation: Cream precipitate which
dissolves in concentrated aqueous ammonia.
a What conclusions can be drawn from
the tests?
Include the formulae of any ions
identified and equations for any
reactions that take place. (4 marks)
b A second student carries out the same
sequence but added dilute sulfuric acid in
the first step rather than dilute nitric acid.
The student continues with the series of
tests and obtains a different result and
comes to an incorrect conclusion.
State and explain the second student's
different result and conclusion. Include an
equation for any different reaction.
(3 marks)
You are provided with unlabelled solutions
of sodium bromide, ammonium bromide,
ammonium iodide, and ammonium iodide.
Describe test-tube tests that would allow
you to identify which solution is which. For
each test, state the observation for a positive
result and write an equation to illustrate a
positive test.
(7 marks)
9
123
REACTIVITY TRENDS
b
Practice questions
1 The equation for the redox reaction between
chlorine and hot concentrated NaOH(aq) is
shown below.
Cl, (g) + NaOH(aq) → 5NaCl(aq)
+ NaClO3(aq) + 3H20(1)
This redox reaction is an example of
disproportionation.
a Explain what is meant by
disproportionation.
(1 mark)
Using oxidation numbers, show
that this reaction is an example of
disproportionation.
(3 marks)
Chlorine reacts with hot iron to form
iron (III) chloride.
(i) Write the full equation, with state
symbols, for the reaction. (2 marks)
(ii) Write a half equation to show the
reduction of chlorine in this reaction.
(1 mark)
(iii) The reaction is repeated using
bromine instead of chlorine.
What difference would you expect in
the rate of the reaction. Explain your
answer.
(1 mark)
2 In Group 2, reactivity increases down the
group.
a Explain, in terms of first ionisation
energy, this trend in reactivity. (4 marks)
b The second ionisation energy is important
when explaining trends in reactivity in
Group 2.
(i) Write an equation, with state
symbols, to represent the second
ionisation energy of calcium.
(1 mark)
(ii) Why is the 2nd ionisation enthalpy
important when explaining
Group 2 reactivity?
(1 mark)
3 The Group 2 element barium was first
isolated by Sir Humphrey Davy in 1808.
Barium has a giant metallic structure and a
melting point of 725 °C.
a Describe, with the aid of a labelled
diagram, the structure and bonding in
barium and explain why barium has a
high melting point.
Include the correct charges on the metal
particles in your diagram.
In your answer, you should use
appropriate technical terms, spelled
correctly.
(3 marks)
b A chemist reacts barium with water.
A solution is formed which conducts
electricity.
(i) Write the equation for the reaction
of barium with water. Include state
symbols.
(2 marks)
(ii) Predict a value for the pH of the
resulting solution.
(1 mark)
(iii) Give the formula of the negative ion
responsible for the conductivity
of the solution formed. (1 mark)
c Heartburn is a form of indigestion caused
by an excess of stomach acid.
State a compound of magnesium that
could be used to treat heartburn.
(1 mark)
d In an experiment, a student makes a
solution of strontium chloride, SrCly, by
adding excess dilute hydrochloric acid to
strontium carbonate.
(i) Describe what the student would
observe and write the equation for
the reaction.
(2 marks)
(ii) Draw a dot-and-cross diagram to
show the bonding of strontium
chloride. Show outer electrons
only.
(2 marks)
e In another experiment, a student attempts
to make a solution of strontium chloride
by adding chlorine water to aqueous
strontium bromide.
(i) Describe what the student would
observe.
(1 mark)
(ii) Write the ionic equation for the
reaction which takes place. (1 mark)
(iii) Chlorine is more reactive than
bromine. Explain why. (4 marks)
OCR F321 Jan 2013 Q4
121
Chapter 8 Practice questions
4 Group 2 elements react with the halogens
a Describe and explain the trend in
reactivity of Group 2 elements with
chlorine as the group is descended.
In your answer you should use appropriate
technical terms, spelled correctly. (5 marks)
b A student was provided with an aqueous
solution of calcium iodide. The student
carried out a chemical test to show that
the solution contained iodide ions. In this
test, a precipitation reaction took place.
(i) State the reagent that the student
would need to add to the solution
of calcium iodide.
(1 mark)
(ii) What observation would show that
the solution contained iodide ions?
(1 mark)
(iii) Write an ionic equation, including
state symbols, for the reaction that
took place.
(1 mark)
(iv) The student is provided with an
aqueous solution of calcium bromide
that is contaminated with calcium
iodide. The student carries out the
same chemical test but this time
needs to add a second reagent to
show that iodide ions are present.
State the second reagent that the
student would need to add. (1 mark)
F321 June 2013 Q4
5 A student used the internet to research
chlorine and some of its compounds.
a They discovered that sea water contains
chloride ions. The student added aqueous
silver nitrate to a sample of sea water.
(i) What would the student see?
(1 mark)
(ii) Write an ionic equation, including
state symbols, for the reaction that
would occur.
(2 marks)
(iii) After carrying out the test in (i),
the student added dilute aqueous
ammonia to the mixture.
What would the student see?
(1 mark)
The student also discovered that chlorine,
Cly, is used in the large-scale treatment of
water.
(i) State one benefit of adding chlorine
to water.
(1 mark)
(ii) Not everyone agrees that chlorine
should be added to drinking water.
Suggest one possible hazard of adding
chlorine to drinking water. (1 mark)
The equation for the reaction of chlorine
with water is shown below.
Cl2(g) + H2O(1) HCl(aq) + HClO(aq)
(i) State the oxidation number of
chlorine in
ClHCI; HCIO
(1 mark)
(ii) The reaction of chlorine with water is
a disproportionation reaction.
Use the oxidation numbers in (i)
to explain why.
(2 marks)
(iii) Chlorine reacts with sodium
hydroxide to form bleach in another
disproportionation reaction.
Write an equation for this reaction.
(1 mark)
Two other compounds of chlorine are
chlorine dioxide and chloric(V) acid.
(i) Chlorine dioxide, CIO,, is used as a
bleaching agent in both the paper
and the flour industry. When dry,
Clo, decomposes explosively to form
oxygen and chlorine.
Construct an equation for the
decomposition of ClO, (1 mark)
(ii) Chloric(V) acid has the following
percentage composition by mass:
H, 1.20%; CI, 42.0%; 0, 56.8%.
Using this information, calculate the
empirical formula of chloric(V) acid.
Show all of your working. (2 marks)
(iii) What does (V) represent in chloric(V)
acid?
(1 mark)
F321 Jan 2009 Q3
d
122
REACTIVITY TRENDS
8.1 Group 2
Specification reference: 3.1.2
Characteristic physical properties
The elements in Group 2 of the periodic table are metals, sometimes
named the alkaline earth metals. The name comes from the alkaline
properties of the metal hydroxides. The elements are reactive metals
and do not occur in their elemental form naturally. On Earth, they are
found in stable compounds such as calcium carbonate, CaCoz.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ redox reactions of Group 2
elements
→ trends in reactivity and
ionisation énergies
action of water on Group 2
oxides
uses of some Group 2
compounds.
Redox reactions and reactivity
Reducing agents
Each Group 2 element has two outer shell electrons, two more than
the electron configuration of a noble gas. The two electrons are in the
outer s sub-shell.
Table 1 Outer-shell electron
configurations of Group 2 atoms and
Group 2 ions
Redox reactions are the most common type of reaction of Group 2
elements. Each metal atom is oxidised, losing two electrons to form
a 2+ ion with the electron configuration of a noble gas.
Group 2 ion
Be2+
[He]
Ca 7 Ca2+ + 2e Ca is oxidised
[Ar]4s [Ar]
Another species will gain these two electrons and be reduced.
The Group 2 element is called a reducing agent because it has
reduced another species.
Mg2+ [Ne]
Group 2 atom
Be [He] 252
Mg [Ne] 3s
Ca [Ar] 452
Sr [kr] 5s
Ba [Xe] 6s2
Ra [Rn] ?s?
•
[Ar]
Ca2+
Sp2+
[kr]
Table 1 compares the outer shell electron configurations of Group 2
atoms with Group 2 ions.
Ba2+
[Xel
Ra?[Rn]
Redox reactions with oxygen
The Group 2 elements all react with oxygen to form a metal oxide
with the general formula MO, made up of M2+ and 02- ions.
You will have seen the reaction of magnesium with oxygen in the air
in the laboratory. The magnesium burns with a brilliant white light
and forms white magnesium oxide.
A Figure 1 Group 2 elements, from
left to right - calcium, beryllium, and
magnesium
2Mg(s) + O2(g) 2Mgo(s)
→ +2
0
-2
The total changes in oxidation number balance:
oxidation
reduction
Synoptic link
• two Mg in 2Mg
two O in O
each Mg increases by +2
each o decreases by -2
total increase = +4
total decrease = -4
If you are unsure about redox
reactions and oxidation numbers,
look back at Topic 4.3, Redox.
108
8.2 The halogens
Tests for halide ions
Precipitation reactions with aqueous silver ions
Aqueous halide ions react with aqueous silver ions to form precipitates
of silver halides, as shown by the general equation below. X-(aq)
represents an aqueous solution of any halide.
Agt(aq) + X-(aq) → AgX(s)
This reaction forms the basis for a test for the presence of halides.
Halide tests are discussed in detail in Topic 8.3, Qualitative analysis.
Halide ions as reducing agents
In the displacement reactions between halogen and halide ions, the halogen
gained electrons and the halide lost electrons. So halogens are oxidising
agents and halide ions are reducing agents.
The reducing ability of halide ions can be shown by their reactions with
sulfuric acid, H,SO, which is a strong oxidising agent. If a reaction takes
place, the halide ions will be oxidised to form the halogen.
Chloride ions are not powerful enough to reduce H,SO
Bromide ions are more powerful and can reduce H,50, to sulfur dioxide, SO:
2H+ + H2SO4 + 2Br -50,+Bry+2H,0
Notice that the both the atoms and the charges balance.
lodide ions are even more powerful and reduce the sulfur dioxide formed to
sulfur, S, which is then reduced further to hydrogen sulfide, H,S.
The unbalanced equations below are for the stepwise reduction,
by lions, of H2SO, to H,S.
Step 1 H+ + H2SO4 +1-502 +12 + H20
Step 2 H+ + SO, +1-S ++ H20
Step 3 H+ +5+1 H,S+,
a Balance the equations
b What are the oxidation number changes in each stage?
c Write an overall equation for the conversion of H,SO, to H,S
Summary questions
1 State and explain the trend in boiling points of the halogens fluorine
to iodine.
(3 marks)
2 Write full and ionic equations for displacement reactions of
Cl, (g) with
a KBr(aq) b Mgl (aq).
(4 marks)
3 Chlorine reacts with hot concentrated NaOH(aq) as below.
3C1, (aq) + 6NaOH(aq) - NaCIO, (aq) + 5NaCl(aq) + 3H,0(1)
Show that this is a disproportionation reaction.
(3 marks)
116
REACTIVITY TRENDS
The reaction of chlorine with water
You will know that chlorine is used in water purification. Chlorine
began to be widely used as a disinfectant for drinking water treatment
over 100 years ago, revolutionising public health by reducing the
incidence of waterborne diseases by killing harmful bacteria.
When small amounts of chlorine are added to water, a disproportionation
reaction takes place. For each chlorine molecule, one chlorine atom is
oxidised and the other chlorine atom is reduced.
Cl, (aq) + H2O(l) → HCIO (aq) + HCl(aq)
-1
reduction
oxidation
+
+1
unicef
The two products are both acids, chloric(I) acid, HCIO, and
hydrochloric acid, HCl. The bacteria are killed by chloric(I) acid and
chlorate(I) ions, CIO, rather than by chlorine. Chloric(I) acid also acts
as a weak bleach. You can demonstrate this by adding some indicator
solution to a solution of chlorine in water. The indicator first turns red,
from the presence of the two acids. The colour then disappears as the
bleaching action of chloric(I) acid takes effect.
Domestos
EXTENDED
GEAM-KILL
The reaction of chlorine with cold, dilute aqueous sodium hydroxide
The reaction of chlorine with water is limited by the low solubility of
chlorine in water. If the water contains dissolved sodium hydroxide,
much more chlorine dissolves and another disproportionation reaction
takes place.
Figure 3 Household bleach contains
sodium chlorate(), NACIO, made by
reacting chlorine with sodium hydroxide
Cl, (aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → NaClO(aq) + NaCl(aq) + H2O(l)
-1
reduction
7 +1
oxidation
The resulting solution contains a large concentration of chlorate(I),
Clo, ions from the sodium chlorate(I), Nacio, that is formed. This
solution finds a use as household bleach, which is made by reacting
chlorine with cold dilute aqueous sodium hydroxide (See Figure 3).
Synoptic link
You will learn about the reaction
of chlorine and methane in
Topic 12.2, Chemical reactions
of alkanes.
Benefits and risks of chlorine use
Although chlorine is beneficial in ensuring that our water is fit to
drink and that bacteria are killed, chlorine is also an extremely toxic
gas. Chlorine is a respiratory irritant in small concentrations, and large
concentrations can be fatal.
Chlorine in drinking water can react with organic hydrocarbons such as
methane, formed from decaying vegetation. Chlorinated hydrocarbons
are formed, which are suspected of causing cancer. However, the overall
risk to health of not adding chlorine to the water supply is far greater than
the risk posed by the chlorinated hydrocarbons. The quality of drinking
water would be compromised and diseases such as typhoid and cholera
might break out. Before safeguarding against what might be a minimal
risk, you should also consider why chlorine is added to drinking water
in the first place. After a natural disaster one of the very first, life-saving
tasks is to ensure that the survivors have a safe water supply (Figure 4).
Figure 4 In water, chlorine tablets
release chlorine in low concentrations
at a steady rate. The tablets are used
to purify water for drinking and in
swimming pools and can be used to
purify water supplies after a natural
disaster
115
