10
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
Synoptic link
Catalysis – sustainability and economic importance
It is estimated that 90% of all chemical materials are produced using
a catalyst. Catalysts increase the rate of many industrial chemical
reactions by lowering the activation energy. This then reduces the
temperature needed for the process and the energy requirements
You learnt about atom economy in
Topic 3.4, Reaction quantities.
If a chemical process requires less energy, then less electricity or fossil
fuel is used. Making the product faster and using less energy can cut costs
and increase profitability. The economic advantages of using a catalyst
outweigh any costs associated with developing a catalytic process.
The modern focus on sustainability requires industry to operate processes
with high atom economies and fewer pollutants. Using less fossil fuel will
cut emissions of carbon dioxide, a gas linked to global warming.
Autocatalysis
A chemical reaction is said to have undergone autocatalysis if a reaction
product acts as a catalyst for that reaction. Typically the reaction starts
slowly and then speeds up as the products are formed.
An example of autocatalysis is shown in the equation below
2MnO4 + 16H* + 50,0,2- →2Mn2+ + 84,0 + 1000,
This reaction is very slow in the absence of a catalyst. However Mn3+ ions can
act as a catalyst because manganese easily changes between the oxidation
states, Mn + and Mn+.
In the first step of the autocatalysis, the Mn2+ formed reduces MnO, to Mn3+,
as shown in the equation below.
4Mn2+ + MnO4 + 8H* — 5Mn3+ + 44,0
The Mn3+ then oxidises the C,042- to CO2, reforming Mn2+.
1 What is the catalyst?
2 Write an equation for the reforming of Mn2+.
Summary questions
1 State the difference between a homogeneous catalyst and a heterogeneous catalyst.
(1 mark)
2 Describe the effect of a catalyst on the activation energy of a chemical reaction and on the enthalpy
change of reaction.
(2 marks)
3 Methanol can be manufactured by the reaction of carbon dioxide with hydrogen as shown in the equation:
3H2(g) + CO2(g)=CH2OH(g) + H20(g) AH = -49 kJ mol-1
The activation energy of the forward reaction is +225 kJ mol-1.
a Draw an enthalpy profile diagram for this reaction.
(2 marks)
b Calculate the activation energy of the reverse reaction.
(2 marks)
151
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
10
CH,(g) + H2O(g) = CO(g) + 3H2(g)
AH = +210 kJ mol-!
a The pressure of the equilibrium mixture is
increased.
Explain what happens to the position of
the equilibrium.
(2 marks)
b The temperature of the equilibrium
mixture is increased.
Explain what happens to the position of
the equilibrium.
(2 marks)
The reaction is actually carried out in the
presence of a nickel catalyst at a pressure
of 30 atmospheres.
(i) Suggest why the manufacturer uses a
pressure of 30 atmospheres. (1 mark)
(ii) The nickel catalyst increases the rate.
Use a labelled diagram of the
Boltzmann distribution of molecular
energies to explain why. (3 marks)
OCR F322 Jun 2012 Q3 (a) (b) (c)
In the chemical industry, methanol, CH,OH,
is synthesised by reacting together carbon
monoxide and hydrogen in the presence of
copper, zinc oxide and alumina which act as a
catalyst. This is a reversible reaction.
CO(g) + 2H,(g) = CH,OH(g)
AH = -91 kJ mol-1
a High pressures and low temperatures
would give the maximum equilibrium
yield of methanol.
Explain why.
(2 marks)
b Explain why the actual conditions used in
the chemical industry might be different
from those in (a) above. (2 marks)
F322 June 2009 04
6
Calculate the equilibrium
concentration of NO (g) in mol dm?
(1 mark)
b Nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas produce
ammonia gas as shown below.
N2(g) + 3H2(g) = 2NH3(g)
(i) Write the expression for K for this
equilibrium.
(1 mark)
(ii) At 200 °C, the equilibrium
concentrations are
N,(g): 9.35 mol dm-3,
H, (g): 0.32 mol dm-;
NH,(g) 1.54 mol dm-3.
Calculate the numerical value of K.
(2 marks)
Hydrogen and iodine are mixed together in a
sealed container at constant temperature and
the mixture is allowed to reach equilibrium.
H2(g) + 1,(g) = 2HI(g) AH = -9 kJ mol-1
At a particular temperature the equilibrium
constant Kis 35.0. At this temperature:
the concentration of
H, (g) = 2.10 x 10-4 moldm-3
the concentration of
HI(g) = 1.507 x 10-2 moldm-3.
a (i) Write an expression for K. (1 mark)
(ii) Calculate the equilibrium
concentration of I (g). (2 mark)
b A closed system is required for dynamic
equilibrium to be established.
State two other features of a dynamic
equilibrium.
(1 mark)
C The equilibrium mixture is heated whilst
keeping the volume constant.
Predict how the composition of the
equilibrium mixture changes.
Explain your answer.
(2 mark)
d The equilibrium mixture is compressed at
constant temperature.
Predict the effect on the composition of
the equilibrium mixture changes.
Explain your answer.
(2 mark)
7
This question looks at two systems in
equilibrium.
a The equilibrium system below is set up.
N,O_(g) = 2NO, (g)
K = 5.0 x 10-3 moldm-3
(i) Write the expression for K. (1 mark)
(ii) At equilibrium, the concentration
of N, O, is 0.50 mol dm.
163
10.3 The Boltzmann distribution
Specification reference: 3.2.2
The energy of moving particles
You learnt at GCSE that molecules in a gas move at high speed,
colliding with each other and with the walls of the container they are
held in. These collisions are said to be elastic; the molecules do not
slow down as a result of a collision and no energy is lost.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the Boltzmann distribution
the Boltzmann distribution
and activation energy
the Boltzmann distribution,
temperature changes, and
catalysts.
-
the
In a gas, a liquid, or a solution, some molecules move slowly with
low energy and some molecules move fast with high energy. Most
molecules move close to the average speed and have close to the
average energy. This spread of molecular energies in gases is known
as the Boltzmann distribution (Figure 1). The graph is marked with a
line, E, that represents the activation energy of a reaction. You can
see from the shaded area that only a small proportion of the molecules
have more energy than E, that is, enough energy to react.
Synoptic link
You learnt about activation energy
in Topic 9.1, Enthalpy changes.
Study tip
number of molecules with a given
energy
When sketching the Boltzmann
curve, make sure it starts at the
origin and the curve never crosses
the x-axis, even at high energy.
energy
A Figure 1 The Boltzmann distribution of molecular energies
There are a number of features of the Boltzmann distribution:
No molecules have zero energy - the curve starts at the origin.
The area under the curve is equal to the total number of molecules.
• There is no maximum energy for a molecule - the curve does
not meet the x-axis at high energy. The curve would need to
reach infinite energy to meet the x-axis.
The Boltzmann distribution and temperature
The effect of temperature on a Boltzmann distribution curve is shown
in Figure 2. As the temperature increases, the average energy of the
molecules also increases. A small proportion molecules will still have
low energy, but more molecules have higher energy. The graph is
now stretched over a greater range of energy values. The peak of the
graph is lower on the y-axis and further along the x-axis - the peak is
at a higher energy. The number of molecules is the same, so the area
under the curve remains the same.
152
Chapter 10 Practice questions
Practice questions
1 The diagram below shows an energy profile
diagram for an endothermic reaction.
Include the
• products
enthalpy change of reaction, AH
activation energy for the forward
reaction, E.
(3 marks)
enthalpy
12
N.(g) + 3H (g)
enthalpy
-
-
-
-
-
2
progress of reaction
a What physical quantities are shown by
the labels 1 and 2?
(2 marks)
b Explain the effect of the presence of a
catalyst on the two quantities. (2 marks)
a Reaction rates can be increased or
decreased by changing conditions of
temperature and pressure.
(i) Explain how increasing the
temperature increases the rate
of reaction.
Include a labelled sketch of the
Boltzmann distribution. Label
the axes.
(4 marks)
Your answer needs to be clear and well
organised using the correct terminology.
(ii) Describe and explain the effect of
decreasing the pressure on the rate
of a reaction.
(2 marks)
OCR F322 June 2014 Q6 (a)
progress of reaction
(ii) What is the value of the enthalpy
change of formation of ammonia?
(1 mark)
(iii) The reaction between nitrogen and
hydrogen can be catalysed.
Suggest a possible value for the
activation energy of the catalysed
forward reaction.
(1 mark)
(iv) What is the value of the activation
energy for the uncatalysed reverse
reaction (the decomposition
of ammonia into nitrogen and
hydrogen)?
(1 mark)
OCR June 2012 Q4 (a)
4 State and explain the effect, if any, of the
following changes to the position of the
equilibrium system below.
250,(g) + O2(g) = 250 (g) AH = -197 kJ mol-1
a Increasing the concentration of So,
(1 mark)
b Increasing the pressure.
(1 mark)
c Increasing the temperature (1 mark)
d Adding a suitable catalyst. (1 mark)
5 Hydrogen has many industrial uses including
making margarine and ammonia.
Hydrogen can be made by the reaction
between methane and steam.
3
The uses of catalysts have great economic
and environmental importance. For example,
catalysts are used in ammonia production and
in catalytic converters.
a Nitrogen and hydrogen react together in
the production of ammonia, NH,.
N,(g) + 3H, (g) = 2NH, (g)
AH = -92 kJ mol-1
The activation energy for the forward
reaction, E, is +250 kJ mol-I.
(i) Complete the enthalpy profile
diagram for this reaction between
nitrogen and hydrogen.
162
10
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
The equilibrium concentrations are:
[H,(g)] = 8.00 x 10-4 mol dm-3
Summary questions
[1, (g)] = 1.20 x 10-4 mol dm-3
• [HI(g)] = 2.28 x 10-mol dm3
Step 1: Write the expression for K.
K= [HI(g)]
1 The reversible reaction below is
allowed to reach equilibrium:
[H,(g)] [L2(g)]
Step 2: Calculate K.
K = _
(2.28 x 10-3,2
= 54.2
(8.00 x 10-4) x (1.20 x 10-4)
CH,COOH() + C,H,OH() =
CH,COOC2H5(1) + H20(1)
At equilibrium, the
concentrations of
CH,COOC, H.(I) and H,O(1)
are 0.25 mol dm 3. The
concentration of CH,COOH (1)
is 0.10 mol dm' and of
C,H,OH() is 0.40 mol dm-3.
a Write the expression
for K for this equilibrium.
(1 mark)
b Calculate a value for K.
1 mark)
o Worked example 2: Writing and calculating K.
In the manufacture of ammonia at 400°C, the equilibrium
concentrations are N2(g): 18.6 moldm", H2(g): 0.900 moldm-,
NH, (g): 1.50 moldm-3.
N, (g) + 3H2(g) = 2NH2(g)
Calculate the value for K, to three significant figures.
Step 1: Write the expression for K
- [NH,(g)12
^
[N, (g)] [H,(g)
Step 2: Calculate K.
(1.50)
(18.6) (0.900)3 = 0.166 (dmºmol-2)
2 The reversible reaction below is
allowed to reach equilibrium at
constant temperature.
H2(g) +12(g) =2HI(g)
The equilibrium concentrations
are 0.40 mol dm-3H2(g),
0.30 mol dm-31, (g),
and 0.14 mol dm-3 HI(g). Write
the expression for K and
calculate a value for K.
(2 marks)
What does the value of K tell us?
In the two examples above, the calculated K values were 54.2 and
0.166. The magnitude of K indicates the relative proportions of
reactants and products in the equilibrium system.
As a rough guide,
3 For the equilibrium system
250,(g) + O2(g) =2503 (8)
the equilibrium concentrations
.
a K value of 1 indicates a position of equilibrium that is halfway
between reactants and products.
are:
a K value > 1 indicates a position of equilibrium that is towards
the products, for example, 54.2 in worked example 1.
a K value < 1 indicates a position of equilibrium that is towards
the reactants, for example, 0.166 in worked example 2.
[s0, (g)] = 0.23 mol dm-3,
[0,(g)] = 1.37 moldm-3,
(S0, (g)] = 0.92 mol dm?
Write the expression for K
and calculate the value of
K at this temperature.
(2 marks)
So the larger the value of K, the further the position of equilibrium
lies to the right-hand side and the greater the concentrations of the
products compared to the reactants.
161
10
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
Making ammonia with the Haber process
The equation for the Haber process is shown below.
N, (g) + 3H, (g)=2NH2(g) AH =-92 kJ mol-1
cheaply, and safely. The actual conditions vary depending
on the process; however, temperatures of 350-500°C and
pressures of 100-200 atm are usual. An iron catalyst is
used to speed up the reaction so that lower temperatures
can be used and operating costs are reduced. Only about
15% of the nitrogen and hydrogen is converted to ammonia.
le Chatelier's principle can be used to predict the best
conditions of temperature and pressure to force the
equilibrium to the right in order to produce the maximum
yield of ammonia.
A low temperature will push the equilibrium to the right.
A high pressure will push the equilibrium to the right.
Why not use these conditions?
However, unreacted nitrogen and hydrogen are recycled
repeatedly, so nearly all of the nitrogen and hydrogen used is
eventually converted into ammonia.
A low temperature would produce a high yield
of product, but would do so very slowly. If the
temperature is too low, the rate may be so slow that
equilibrium may not even be established.
A high pressure not only increases the yield but also
forces the molecules closer together, increasing the
concentration and increasing the rate of reaction.
However, a very high pressure requires a very strong
container and a large quantity of energy, increasing the
cost of the process. Safety is also a concern, as a failure
in the steelwork or seals of the plant could lead to hot
gases, including toxic ammonia, leaking under pressure,
endangering the workforce and the surrounding area.
A typical ammonia plant operates under compromise
conditions using a high enough temperature to give a
reasonable rate without shifting the equilibrium position
too far away from ammonia and back to the reactants. This
ensures that a good yield of ammonia is achieved quickly,
A Figure 8 Air-separating factory for producing industrial
gases such as nitrogen for the Haber process
Explain the two predictions made by le Chatelier's
principle for producing the maximum yield of ammonia
in the Haber process
Summary questions
1 State the result of an increase in pressure on the following equilibria.
a N20,(g) = 2NO, (g)
b CO(g) + 2H2(g) =CH,OH(g)
c H2(g) + Brą (g)=2HBr(g)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
2 State the result of an increase in temperature on the following equilibria.
AH = +180 kJ mol-1
b 2502(g) + O2(g) = 250,(8) AH = -197 kJ mol-1
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
3 State how you would alter the temperature and pressure to increase the yield of the products in the equilibria below.
a CO(g) + 2H2(g)=CH,OH(g) AH = -92 kJ mol-1
(2 marks)
AH = +124 kJ mol-1
(2 marks)
159
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
10
Figure 3 shows the formation of a product over the course of a
chemical reaction. The slope of the curve is steepest at the start of the
reaction, when the rate is greatest. The curve becomes less steep as the
reaction proceeds. Eventually the curve becomes a straight line parallel
to the x-axis when the reaction is complete and the rate is zero.
Altering the rate of a chemical reaction
You will remember from GCSE that a number of factors can change
the rate of a chemical reaction:
concentration (or pressure when reactants are gases)
temperature
use of a catalyst
surface area of solid reactants.
To understand why the rate changes, you need to think about
reactions in terms of the particles involved. The collision theory
states that two reacting particles must collide for a reaction to occur.
Usually only a small proportion of collisions result in a chemical
reaction. In most collisions, the molecules collide but then bounce off
each other and remain chemically unchanged.
Figure 4 You can think of the effect
of concentration as like a crowded
street. The greater the number of people
in a crowd, the more chance there is of
a collision taking place
Why are some collisions effective and others ineffective?
An effective collision is one that leads to a chemical reaction (Figure 5).
A collision will be effective if two conditions have been met:
Synoptic link
You learnt about activation energy
is in Topic 9.1, Enthalpy changes.
We will look in more detail at
activation energy and reaction rate
in Topic 10.2, Catalysts.
the particles collide with the correct orientation
the particles have sufficient energy to overcome the activation
energy barrier of the reaction.
Ineffective collision
No reaction - the two blue
atoms must collide for a reaction to occur
Effective collision
Reaction takes place, as the two blue atoms
collide to form a new product
Figure 5 For a reaction to occur, collisions must take place with the correct
orientation and with sufficient energy for a reaction to occur
How does increasing the concentration affect the rate of reaction?
When the concentration of a reactant is increased, the rate of reaction
generally increases. An increase in concentration increases the number
of particles in the same volume. The particles are closer together and
collide more frequently. In a given period of time there will therefore
be more effective collisions (correct orientation and sufficient energy)
and an increased rate of reaction (Figure 6).
Figure 6 Marble chips in different
concentrations of acids - the highest
concentration on the left and the
lowest concentration on the right. The
more concentrated the acid, the more
frequent the collisions of H*(aq) ions
with the marble chips and the faster
hydrogen gas is produced
145
10.1 Reaction rates
How does increasing the pressure of a gas affect the rate of reaction?
When a gas is compressed into a smaller volume the pressure of a gas
is increased and the rate of reaction increases. The concentration of the
gas molecules increases as the same number of gas molecules occupy a
smaller volume. The gas molecules are closer together and collide more
frequently, leading to more effective collisions in the same time.
Methods for following the progress of a reaction
The progress of a chemical reaction can be followed by:
Study tip
When asked to identify a method
for measuring the rate of a reaction,
the equation may give you a clue.
If a product has a (g) as its state
symbol then the method could
involve gas collection.
• monitoring the removal (decrease in concentration) of a reactant
following the formation increase in concentration) of a product.
The method chosen will depend on the properties and physical states of
the reactants and products in the reaction. In addition to concentration,
measurable properties that might change as the reaction proceed
include gas volume, mass of reactants or products, and colour.
Synoptic link
As part of the practical skills
required for your course, you need
to know how to measure mass,
volumes of solutions, and volumes
of gases.
Reactions that produce gases
If a reaction produces a gas, two methods that can be used to
determine the rate of the reaction are:
. monitoring the volume of gas produced at regular time intervals
using gas collection
. monitoring the loss of mass of reactants using a balance.
This practical application box tells
you how to measure volumes of
gases.
Volume of gas produced and mass loss are both proportional to the
change in concentration of a reactant or product. So the change in
volume with time or the mass loss with time both give a measure of
the rate of reaction.
Measuring mass, volumes of
solutions, and volumes of gases
are also covered in:
Topic 3.2, Determination of
formulae, for how to measure
mass
Topic 3.4, Reacting quantities,
for how to measure the
volumes of gases
Topic 4.2, Acid-base titrations,
for how to measure volumes of
solutions
Topic 9.2, Measuring enthalpy
changes, for how to measure
mass.
Monitoring the production of a gas using gas collection
The rate of reaction for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, can
be measured using the apparatus shown in Figure 7.
The equation for the reaction is shown below.
2H2O2(aq)
MnO, catalyst
2H,0(1) + 0,()
1 Hydrogen peroxide is added to the conical flask and the bung is replaced.
2 The initial volume of gas in the measuring cylinder is recorded.
clamp
delivery tube
measuring cylinder
Study tip
conical flask
trough
reactants
water
When setting up this experiment
you should ensure the water level
starts close to zero on the scale.
A Figure 7 Apparatus to measure the rate of a reaction in which a gas is produced
146
10.5 The equilibrium constant K - part 1
Specification reference: 3.2.3
The position of equilibrium
In Topic 10.4, you learnt that a dynamic equilibrium exists when the
rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction.
You also learnt about how changing the concentration, temperature,
and pressure can change the position of equilibrium.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ expressions for K
→ calculation of K from
equilibrium concentrations
estimation of the position
of equilibrium from the
magnitude of K.
In this topic you will learn how to calculate equilibrium constants.
An equilibrium constant provides the actual position of equilibrium.
The magnitude of an equilibrium constant indicates whether there
are more reactants or more products in an equilibrium system.
Synoptic link
The equilibrium law
The exact position of equilibrium is calculated using the equilibrium
law. For any reaction at equilibrium it is possible to write an
expression for the equilibrium constant K in terms of equilibrium
concentrations.
You will learn more about
equilibrium constants, including
where the units come from, in
Chapter 19, Equilibrium.
Consider a general reversible reaction:
aA + bB = CC + dD
Study tip
The equilibrium law defines the equilibrium constant K in terms
of concentrations.
K
- [C] [D]
When writing equilibrium
constants, remember that the
concentrations of the products
are always divided by the
concentrations of the reactants.
[A] [B]
[products]
[reactants]
Square brackets, [ ], are shorthand for 'concentration of'.
. a, b, c, d are the balancing numbers in the overall equation.
[A], [B], [C], [D] are the equilibrium concentrations of the
reactants and products of this equilibrium.
For example, the expression for K for the equilibrium reaction
N2(g) + O2(g) = 2NO(g) is:
[NO(g)]
K =
[N,()] [O2(g)]
Calculating K from equilibrium concentrations
To calculate an equilibrium constant you need to know
the equilibrium concentrations of the reactants and products.
Study tip
Don't forget that the balancing
numbers in the equation are
accounted for in the expression
for K, so there's no need to
multiply any concentrations by
the balancing number. Here, for
example, the concentration of
hydrogen iodide is squared - you
don't need to multiply it by two
as well.
6) Worked example 1: Writing and calculating K.
Calculate the value of K for the following equilibrium:
H2(g) + 1,(g) = 2HI(g).
Give your answer to three significant figures.
160
REACTION RATES AND
EQUILIBRIUM
10.1 Reaction rates
Specification reference: 3.2.2, 2.1.3
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
→ the effect of concentration
on reaction rate
► the effect of pressure on
reaction rate
reaction rates from the
gradients of graphs.
How fast is a reaction?
Some chemical reactions are complete within a fraction of a second,
whereas others may take centuries. High explosives detonate immediately
and fireworks shoot upwards producing amazing displays of colour the
instant the fuse burns down (Figure 1), whereas iron rusts relatively
slowly - good news if you want to cross the Forth Rail Bridge (Figure 2).
What is meant by rate of reaction?
The rate of a chemical reaction measures how fast a reactant is
being used up or how fast a product is being formed. The rate of a
reaction can be defined as the change in concentration of a reactant
or a product in a given time.
rate =
change in concentration
time
te moldm-3
-= moldm-35-1
The rate of a reaction is fastest at the start of the reaction, as each
reactant is at its highest concentration.
The rate of reaction slows down as the reaction proceeds, because
the reactants are being used up and their concentrations decrease.
Once one of the reactants has been completely used up, the
concentrations stops changing and the rate of reaction is zero.
Figure 1 Firework display over Tower
Bridge in London. Fireworks are an
example of a fast reaction
Concentration/mol dm-3
Figure 2 The Forth Rail Bridge takes
many years to paint but fortunately,
longer to rust
300
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time/s
A Figure 3 Concentration-time graphs can be used to monitor the rate of
a chemical reaction
144
10.4 Dynamic equilibrium and le Chatelier's principle
Study tip
The effect of temperature on the position of equilibrium for exothermic
and endothermic reactions is summarised in Table 1.
Table 1 The effect of temperature on the position of equilibrium
Forward reaction
Increase temperature
Decrease temperature
When discussing changes in
temperature, always state whether
the forward reaction is exothermic
or endothermic. An exothermic
change has a negative AH value,
and an endothermic change has a
positive AH value.
exothermic
Position of equilibrium
shifts to the left.
Position of equilibrium
shifts to the right.
(A His negative)
More reactants are made.
endothermic
Position of equilibrium
shifts to the right.
More products are made.
Position of equilibrium
shifts to the left.
(A His positive)
More products are made.
More reactants are made.
The effect of pressure changes on equilibrium
Changing the pressure of a system containing gases in equilibrium may
result in the position of equilibrium changing, but only if there are
more gaseous molecules on one side of the equation than the other.
The gases nitrogen dioxide, NO,(g), and dinitrogen tetroxide, N, O,(g),
have different colours. The gases form the equilibrium below.
Study tip
2NO(g)
N20,(g)
brown
colourless
2 mol
1 mol
The pressure of a gas is proportional to its concentration. In the same
container, two moles of NO,(g) would have twice the concentration and
twice the pressure as the same container holding one mole of N, O,(g)
When discussing changes in
pressure, always state whether
there are more moles of gas on the
left or right of the equation.
Increasing the pressure of the system will shift the position of
equilibrium to the side with the fewer molecules, reducing the
pressure of the system.
increase pressure
shift towards fewer
gaseous molecules
As there are fewer gaseous moles on the right-hand side of
the equilibrium, the position of equilibrium shifts to the right
reducing the number of gaseous moles to minimise the increase
in pressure.
• More colourless N, O,(g) is formed and the brown colour fades.
Decreasing the pressure shifts the position of equilibrium in the
opposite direction, to the side with more gaseous moles on the left and
making the brown colour deeper (Figure 7).
2NO2(g) =
brown
N20 (8)
colourless
decrease pressure
shift towards fewer
gaseous molecules
The effect of a catalyst on equilibrium
A catalyst does not change the position of equilibrium; it merely
speeds up the rates of the forward and reverse reactions equally.
A catalyst will, however, increase the rate at which an equilibrium
is established.
Figure 7 Effect and increasing
and decreasing the pressure on the
equilibrium 2NO (9)=N20 (9)
158
10
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
Study tip
Cobalt chloride, Cocl,, dissolves in water to form a pink solution.
The dissolving process actually produces an equilibrium between two
complexes of cobalt that are different colours:
AH [Co(H20),12+(aq) + 4CH(aq) = C0C1,- (aq) + 6H2O(1) AH
is negative
is positive
blue
When discussing changes in
temperature, always state whether
the forward reaction is exothermic
or endothermic.
pink
A Figure 5 The (Co(H20)]2+ (aq)/C0C1, ?- (aq) equilibrium
This equilibrium is sensitive to changes in temperature and the
different colours makes it easy to follow any change in equilibrium
position. You can carry out a simple experiment to show this.
Study tip
1 Dissolve cobalt chloride in water in a boiling tube. Add a small
quantity of hydrochloric acid. Place the boiling tube in some iced
water. The solution is a pink colour.
2 Set up a boiling water bath and transfer the boiling tube into the
boiling water. The solution turns a blue colour.
3 Transfer the boiling tube back to the iced water. The solution
changes back to a pink colour.
u can repeat steps 2 and 3 many times and the colour will change each
time from pink to blue and back to pink again. So how does it work?
A small amount of hydrochoric
acid can be added to provide
more CI-(aq) ions. This shifts the
equilibrium slightly towards the
right and helps to achieve the
colour changes. (See effect of
concentration above)
In the boiling water, you are increasing the heat energy of the system.
This causes the position of equilibrium to shift to minimise the change.
•
As the forward reaction is endothermic (AH is positive), the position
of equilibrium shifts to the right in the endothermic direction, to take
heat energy in and minimise the increase in temperature.
The solution turns a blue colour.
.
Decreasing the temperature shifts the position of equilibrium in the
opposite direction, in the direction that gives out energy, to the reverse
exothermic side (AH is negative) on the left.
Figure 6 summarises these changes.
Increase temperature
Shift in endothermic direction
AH [Co(H20),12+(aq) + 4C1-(aq) = Coc1,- (aq) + 6H2O(1) AH
is negative pink
blue is positive
decrease temperature
Shift in exothermic direction
A Figure 6 The effect of changing temperature on the Co(H20)]2+(aq) CoCl2-(aq)
equilibrium
157
10
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
3 Manganese dioxide, MnO,, catalyst is then quickly
added to the conical flask and the bung is replaced.
A stop clock is started.
4 The volume of gas produced in the measuring cylinder
is recorded at regular intervals until the reaction is
complete.
5 The reaction is complete when no more gas is produced.
Alternatively, a gas syringe can be used instead of a
measuring cylinder.
A graph is plotted of total volume of gas produced
against time. To calculate the initial rate of the reaction,
a tangent is drawn to the curve at t = 0 (Figure 9). The
gradient of the tangent gives the reaction rate.
A Figure 8 Apparatus for collecting a gas with a syringe
120
volume of gas produced/cm3
) Worked example: Calculating
reaction rates from gas produced
Step 1: Plot a graph of volume of gas
produced against time (Figure 8).
Step 2: Draw a tangent at t = 0 (red line in
Figure 8). This is the initial rate.
Step 3: Calculate the rate from the gradient
of the tangent.
rate from the gradient = 4 =
_y_120 - 40
x 24 - 8
= 80 = 5.0 cm's-1
0 20 40 60 80
Time/s
Figure 9 Graph of volume of gas produced against time
Calculate the rate after:
a 24 s
b 40 s
Monitoring the loss of mass of reactants using a balance
The rate of reaction between calcium carbonate and hydrochloric
acid can also be determined by monitoring the loss in mass of the
reactants over a period of time. The equation for the reaction is
shown below.
19:49
194.19
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + CO2(g) + H20(1)
The carbonate and the acid are added to a conical flask on a balance.
The mass of the flask and contents is recorded initially and at
regular time intervals. The reaction is complete when no more gas is
produced so no more mass is then lost. A graph of mass lost against
time is plotted.
Figure 10 Monitoring mass loss
using a balance. The two readings
show that mass has been lost as gas is
released
147
10
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
At higher temperature,
T2, the peak is lower
and shifted to the right
Study tip
number of molecules with a given
energy
At higher temperature,
T2, a greater proportion
of molecules can overcome
the activation energy.
You may be asked to explain how
increasing the temperature or
using a catalyst increases the rate
of a chemical reaction. You will
need to include ideas about the
Boltzmann distribution.
Es
energy
Figure 2 The effect of temperature on the Boltzmann distribution
At higher temperature:
• More molecules have an energy greater than or equal to the
activation energy.
Therefore a greater proportion of collisions will lead to a reaction,
increasing the rate of reaction.
Collisions will also be more frequent as the molecules are moving
faster, but the increased energy of the molecules is much more
important than the increased frequency of collisions.
Summary questions
The Boltzmann distribution and catalysts
In Topic 10.2 you learnt that a catalyst lowers the activation energy of
a reaction. The effect of a catalyst on activation energy is shown on a
Boltzmann distribution curve in Figure 3.
1 Explain what is meant
by the term activation
energy.
(1 mark)
In the presence of a catalyst a greater
proportion of molecules exceeds the
new lower activation energy.
2 Describe and explain how
the rate of reaction is
affected by a decrease
in temperature (2 marks)
activation energy
with catalyst
number of molecules with a
given energy
activation energy
without catalyst
Ec
energy
activation energy reduced
a Sketch a Boltzmann
distribution curve for
a volume of gas at
temperature 1. Add a
second curve for the
distribution at a higher
temperature, T. (2 marks)
b Explain how raising the
temperature increases
the rate of reaction,
using your answer
to (a) above. (2 marks)
c Using the Boltzmann
distribution, explain how
the presence of a catalyst
increases the rate
of reaction. (2 marks)
Figure 3 The effect of a catalyst on the number of molecules with
enough energy to react.
A catalyst provides an alternative reaction route with a lower
activation energy (E, on the graph). Compared to E a greater
proportion of molecules now have an energy equal to, or greater than
the lower activation energy, E. On collision, more molecules will react
to form products. The result is an increase in the rate of reaction.
153
10.4 Dynamic equilibrium and
le Chatelier's principle
Specification reference: 3.2.3
Introducing reversible reactions
When ignited, hydrogen reacts with oxygen in the air to form water
At the end of the reaction all the hydrogen has been used up. The
reaction has gone to completion. The equation contains an arrow
pointing from reactants to products.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of: :
→ dynamic equilibrium
→ le Chatelier's principle
→ the effect of temperature,
concentration, and pressure
on the position of equilibrium
→ catalysts and equilibrium.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(1)
reactants products
In this topic, you will look at some reversible reactions, reactions
that take place in both 'forward' and 'reverse' directions. Many of
these reactions are important industrial processes, for example, the
Haber process for manufacturing ammonia:
N2(g) + 3H2(g) = 2NH3(g)
The = symbol indicates that the reversible reaction is in equilibrium.
Dynamic equilibrium
In an equilibrium system:
the rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse
reaction
the concentrations of reactants and products do not change.
•
Equilibrium systems are dynamic. At equilibrium both the forward
and reverse reactions are taking place. As fast as the reactants are
becoming products, the products are reacting to become reactants.
Therefore in an equilibrium system the concentrations of the reactants
and products remain unchanged even though the forward and reverse
reactions are still taking place.
Synoptic link
See Topic 9.1, Enthalpy changes,
for details of the chemical system
and the surroundings.
For a reaction to remain in equilibrium, the system must be closed.
A closed system is isolated from its surroundings, so the temperature,
pressure, and concentrations of reactants and products are unaffected
by outside influences.
le Chatelier's principle
The position of equilibrium indicates the extent of the reaction.
In a reversible reaction, if the temperature, pressure (for reactions
involving gases), or concentration of the reactants or products is
changed, then the position of equilibrium may change.
le Chatelier's principle states that when a system in equilibrium
is subjected to an external change the system readjusts itself to
minimise the effect of that change.
154
10.1 Reaction rates
B Worked example: Calculating reaction rates from
mass loss
Step 1: Plot a graph of mass lost against time (Figure 10).
Step 2: Draw a tangent to the curve at t = 0 (red line in
Figure 11). This is the initial rate.
Step 3: Calculate the rate from the gradient of the tangent.
rate from the gradient = 4 = 9,0 = 8.6 x 10-gs-!
Step 4: To calculate the rate at a specific time, the same tangent
method is used. In Figure 11, the orange tangent is used
to find the rate of reaction after 100 s.
gradient = * = 2,36 = 1.7 x 10-gs!
mass lost/g
0
50
100
150 200
time/s
250
300
350
Figure 11 Graph of mass loss against time
Summary questions
1 Changing the concentration of a reactant alters the rate of a reaction. State three other factors that can
affect the rate of a chemical reaction. Explain how an increase in concentration increases the rate.
(5 marks)
2 State two possible methods for monitoring the rate of the following reaction:
MgCO2 (s) + 2HCl(aq) — MgCl2(aq) + CO2(g) + H20(1)
(2 marks)
3 The reaction 2N20 (g) 4NO2(g) +0,(g) was carried out. The concentration of the N, O, was recorded every
200 s and the following data obtained.
[N,0.(g)]/mol dm-3 1.00 0.88 0.78 0.69 0.61 0.54 0.48 0.43 0.38 0.34
Time/s 0 200400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
a Plot a graph of (N,O(g)) on the y-axis against time on the x-axis.
(2 marks)
b Calculate the initial rate of reaction and the rate of reaction after 1000 S.
(2 marks)
148
10.4 Dynamic equilibrium and le Chatelier's principle
Looking to Figure 3, you would expect that the position of equilibrium
could be changed by altering the concentrations of the reactants or
products. You can carry out a simple experiment to show this.
1 Add a solution of yellow potassium chromate, K,Croq, to a beaker.
2 Add dilute sulfuric acid, H,SO, dropwise until there is no further
change. The solution turns an orange colour.
3 Add aqueous sodium hydroxide, NaOH(aq), until there is no
further change. The solution changes back to a yellow colour.
You can repeat steps 2 and 3 many times and the colour will change
each time from yellow to orange and back to yellow again. So how
does it work?
When you add dilute sulfuric acid, H,SO, you are increasing the
concentration of H+(aq) ions. This increases the rate of the forward
reaction and so causes the position of equilibrium to shift to minimise
the change in H+ (aq) concentration.
1
2
This shift decreases the concentration of the added reactant, H+(aq).
The position of equilibrium shifts to the right of the equation,
making more products
A new position of equilibrium is established towards the products.
• The solution turns orange as Cr, 0,2- forms.
3
When you add aqueous sodium hydroxide, NaOH(aq), the added OH(aq)
ions react with H+ (aq) ions, decreasing the concentration of H+ (aq) ions.
H(aq) + OH(aq) → H2O(1)
The decreased concentration of the reactant, H(aq) decreases the rate
of the forward reaction and so causes the position of equilibrium to
shift to minimise the change in concentration.
add acid
concentration of H+(aq) increases
1.2-(aq) + 2H+(aq) — CO2-lag) HOM
yellow
orange
1 The shift increases the concentration of the reactant that has been
removed, H(aq).
2 The position of equilibrium shifts to the left, making more of the
H (aq) reactant.
3 A new position of equilibrium is established.
• The solution turns yellow as Cro -(aq) forms.
Figure 4 summarises these changes.
Investigating changes to the position of equilibrium with temperature
Changing the temperature of a system in equilibrium will result in the
position of equilibrium changing.
add alkali
concentration of H+ (aq) decreases
A Figure 4 The effect of changing
the concentration of H+ (aq) on the
Cro, ?-(aq)/Cr,0,2-(aq) equilibrium
The direction in which the equilibrium shifts depends on the sign of AH.
Synoptic link
Forward and reverse directions have the same value for the
enthalpy change - but the signs are opposite.
An increase in temperature shifts the equilibrium position in the
endothermic direction (AH is positive)
An decrease in temperature shifts the equilibrium position in the
exothermic direction (AH is negative)
You met AH in Topic 9.1, Enthalpy
changes.
156
10.2 Catalysts
2
Synoptic link
You will learn more about the
catalytic breakdown of ozone
in Topic 15.2, Organohalogen
compounds in the environment,
Ozone depletion (Cl• radicals as catalyst)
The equation below shows the depletion of ozone, O2, in the
presence of chlorine radicals, Cl, which act as a catalyst.
CI(g)
20,(g) 8) 30,(9)
The reactant (0,) and the catalyst (Cl•) are both gases.
Heterogeneous catalysts
A heterogeneous catalyst has a different physical state from the
reactants. Heterogeneous catalysts are usually solids in contact with
gaseous reactants or reactants in solution. Reactant molecules are
adsorbed (weakly bonded) onto the surface of the catalyst, where
the reaction takes place. After reaction, the product molecules leave
the surface of the catalyst by desorption.
Some of the many common industrial processes that use heterogeneous
catalysis are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Industrial processes involving heterogeneous catalysts
Process
making ammonia (Haber process)
Catalyst
Fe(s)
Equation
N, (g) + 3H2(g) = 2NH2(g)
reforming
Pt(s) or
Rh(s)
Ni(s)
hydrogenation of alkenes
making sulfur trioxide for sulfuric
acid (contact process)
CH24 (g) → CH2(g) + H2(g)
C2H2(g) + H2(g) → CH()
2502(g) + O2(g)=2503(e)
V20(s)
Heterogeneous catalysts and atmospheric pollution
Since 1992 all petrol vehicles manufactured for road use in the UK must be
fitted with a catalytic converter by law to pass the MOT test.
Figure 3 Fumes from car exhaust
pipes
Catalytic converters contain a catalyst made of platinum, rhodium, and
palladium supported on a honeycomb mesh that provides a large surface
area on which the reactions can take place (Figure 4). The hot exhaust
gases are passed over this heterogeneous catalyst, and harmful gases are
converted into less harmful products.
Combustion in a petrol engine forms the toxic gases carbon monoxide and
nitrogen monoxide. In the catalytic converter, carbon monoxide is oxidised
to carbon dioxide, and nitrogen monoxide is reduced to nitrogen gas.
The carbon dioxide and nitrogen products are both non-toxic and can be
released into the atmosphere. In addition, any unburnt hydrocarbons are
oxidised to water and carbon dioxide.
Figure 4 Catalytic converters have
a large surface area for heterogeneous
catalysis to convert harmful exhaust
gases into less harmful gases that can
be released into the atmosphere
Write a balanced equation for the reaction of carbon monoxide and
nitrogen monoxide in a catalytic converter.
150
10.2 Catalysts
Specification reference: 3.2.2
What does a catalyst do?
A catalyst is a substance that changes the rate of a chemical reaction
without undergoing any permanent change itself.
•
The catalyst is not used up in the chemical reaction.
Learning outcomes
Demonstrate knowledge,
understanding, and application of:
► the role of a catalyst
► enthalpy profile diagrams
→ homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysts.
The catalyst may react with a reactant to form an intermediate
or may provide a surface on which the reaction can take place.
At the end of the reaction the catalyst is regenerated.
A catalyst increases the rate of a chemical reaction by providing
an alternative reaction pathway of lower activation energy. See the
enthalpy profile diagrams in Figure 1 and Figure 2 for catalysis in
exothermic and endothermic reactions (Figure 1).
Exothermic
Endothermic
Es: without catalyst
Ec: with catalyst
reactants
products
enthalpy
enthalpy
Study tip
When drawing enthalpy profile
diagrams:
Reactants and products should
be shown at the correct levels
with respect to each other
AH should be shown with an
arrow pointing in the correct
direction
• The activation energy should be
shown with an upward arrow.
AH
AH
reactants
Y
products
_
progress of reaction
progress of reaction
Figure 1 Exothermic reaction with and
without a catalyst
A Figure 2 Endothermic reaction, with
and without a catalyst
Types of catalyst
Homogeneous catalysts
A homogeneous catalyst has the same physical state as the reactants.
The catalyst reacts with the reactants to form an intermediate. The
intermediate then breaks down to give the product and regenerates
the catalyst.
Synoptic link
You will learn more about esters
and esterification in Topic 26.4,
Carboxylic acid derivatives.
Two examples of the many reactions of gases and liquids that use
homogeneous catalysis are shown below:
1 Making esters with sulfuric acid as a catalyst
The equation below shows the preparation of the ester,
CH,COOC,Hz, from ethanoic acid, CH,COOH, and ethanol,
C,H,OH. Sulfuric acid, H,SO,, is the catalyst.
H,SO (1)
C,H,OH(1) + CH,COOH(l) = CH,COOC,Hz(1) + H20(1)
Synoptic link
You learnt about activation
energies and endothermic and
exothermic reactions in Chapter 9,
Enthalpy.
The reactants (ethanol and ethanoic acid) and the catalyst (sulfuric
acid) are all liquids.
149
REACTION RATES AND EQUILIBRIUM
10
Figure 1 illustrates a system in which the equilibrium has been
disrupted by adding more reactant molecules. The position of
equilibrium shifts to the right of the equation. More products are
made than reactants until a new equilibrium is established.
system in equilibrium
equilibrium disrupted
by the addition of more reactants
system readjusted
A Figure 1 When an equilibrium system is subjected to a change the position of equilibrium moves in such
a way as to minimise the change
The effect of concentration changes on equilibrium
Changing the concentration of a reactant or a product in an equilibrium
system will change the rate of the forward or reverse reactions. The
position of equilibrium will then change. Figure 2 shows the effect
of changing the concentration of reactants or products.
increase in concentration of A or B
decrease in concentration of Cor D
When an equilibrium system adjusts as a result of a change:
A
+
B
=
C
+
D
if there are more products formed, the position of the
equilibrium has shifted to the right
if there are more reactants formed, the position of the
equilibrium has shifted to the left.
increase in concentration of C or D
decrease in concentration of A or B
A Figure 2 The effect of concentration
on the position of the equilibrium
If you choose equilibria where the reactants and products have
different colours, simple experiments can illustrate how the
position of equilibrium changes with an external change.
Investigating changes to the position of equilibrium with concentration
The equilibrium between aqueous chromate ions, Cro 2-, and
dichromate ions, Cr,0,2-, is sensitive to changes in acid concentration.
Solutions of chromate and dichromate ions have different colours
so it is easy to see any shift in the position of equilibrium (Figure 3).
20r0,-(aq) + 2H+ (aq) = Cr,0,2-(aq) + H2O(1)
yellow
orange
Figure 3 The chromate/dichromate equilibrium
155
