Exam-style questions
7.3
7 A teacher demonstrates electromagnetic induction by dropping
a bar magnet through a flat coil of wire connected to a
datalogger.
very small
coil of wire
datalogger
Sketch a graph to show how the e.m.f induced across the
coil varies as the coil moves from A to B at a constant
speed.
Induced
e.m.f.
-
IRIERILIN
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
FIIIIIIIIII
-.--.-.-
IRILIBRI
HILLITE
-.-
The data from the datalogger is used to produce a graph of
induced e.m.f across the coil against time.
Induced 4
em.f.
LIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
IBEIREIBIBILBIR BIEBIE
LILLI LILILLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL
LIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
LIILLILLLLLLLLLLLLLLL
LIBRIBETEISELE EIN BIEBIEBIE BIBIENIE
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
FILEIREILLHIL HILTI HILI LILILILLIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
DIE DIE BEDIE IDEEEEEE
LILEIREITILLILIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
LILILLIILLILIILLILLILIILLILIILLILILLLLLLLLLLLLLLL
LILLILIIDILIITILI TIL LILLILIIIII
2
Distance
-
T
10
[Total: 10]
111111
TIITTI
*(a) Explain the shape of the graph and the relative values on
both axes.
[6]
(b) The teacher then sets up another demonstration using a
large U-shaped magnet and a very small coil of wire, which
is again connected to a datalogger.
The north pole is vertically above the south pole and the
coil is moved along the line AB, which is midway between
the poles. The magnetic field due to the U-shaped magnet
has been drawn. The plane of the coil is horizontal.
79
7.3
Thus, by adjusting the accelerating voltage and the strength of the electromagnet (by altering the current
through it) we can identify the various chemicals contained within a sample, as each is registered in the
detector. The intensity of the current in the detector can indicate the proportion of a given chemical
within the sample.
WORKED EXAMPLE
A company selling sea salt for cooking wanted to find out if its ratio of chlorine isotopes was different
from the usual abundance ratio. In nature, the 35Cl isotope is more common than the 37Cl one by a
factor of 3: 1. They analysed a sample of their product using a mass spectrometer that would ionise
the chlorine atoms into single minus ions. What would be the difference between the radii of curvature
caused for the chlorine isotopes, if the mass spectrometer operated at an accelerating potential of 3.0 kV
and had a magnetic field strength of 3.0T?
9 2V
m Br2
p2 - 2Vm
B29
2Vm
B29
For 35C1-:
2 x 3000 x (35 x 1.67 x 10-27)
(3.0)2 x 1.6 10-19
r = 0.0156 m
For 37C1-:
2 x 3000 (37 x 1.67 x 10-27)
(3.0)2 x 1.6 10-19
r = 0.0160m
So the difference in the radius of curvature of the path of these two ions is 0.4 mm.
=
1
Questions
| (a) How much force would be felt by a 12 cm wire carrying 0.8 A at right angles to the Earth's surface
magnetic field of 5 x 10-5T?
(b) How much force would be felt by a proton travelling across the Earth's magnetic field at 500 ms-T?
(c) How fast would a proton need to travel in order for the electromagnetic force on it to make it orbit
the Earth at the surface? (Radius of Earth = 6.4 x 106 m.) Comment on your answer.
An electron beam travels across a 36 mT magnetic field at 45% to the field. If the electrons are travelling at
10% of the speed of light, what is the force exerted on each electron by the field?
charge
distance and current = tima
time
3 Speed =
. Explain how F = BIL is actually the same equation as F = Bqv but
time
considered for many charges in a group.
4
For the investigation on salt in the worked example on this page, calculate the difference in the radii of
curvature that would be found if the company investigated the two isotopes of sodium: 23Nat and 22Nat.
Explain why such small differences can be easily detected by a machine like that shown in fig D.
70
Electromagnetic effects
7.3
where q is the charge on the particle, vis its velocity, and is
the angle between the velocity and the magnetic field lines. A
simplified situation that is often considered is that of an electron
(charge 'e') moving at right angles to the field (sin 90º = 1). This
reduces the formula to F = Bev, which is commonly remembered
by students as 'Fred = Bev'.
A chemical to be identified enters the machine and is ionised.
This charge will then allow it to be accelerated in two different
ways within the mass spectrometer. An electric field increases its
speed. Then it feels a force when travelling through the field of the
electromagnet, which changes its direction.
ACCELERATION
IONISATION
electromagnet
Investigation
Investigating Fred = Bev
repeller +
1
(+ve) I
DEFLECTION
-
vaporised
sample
NANNAN
vacuum
pump
detector
amplifier
DETECTION
-
fig C Investigating the force on charged particles moving in a magnetic
field. (Image O 3B Scientific GmbH, Hamburg).
You can investigate how much force will be on an electron moving
across a magnetic field using equipment like that shown in fig C. The
grid allows you to observe the path travelled by the electrons, and
there is a standard formula for calculating the magnetic field strength
provided by a pair of parallel electromagnetic coils, often referred to
as Helmholtz coils.
recorder
fig D Schematic of the basic parts of a mass spectrometer.
The force on a charged particle moving at right angles to a
magnetic field is given by:
F = Bqv
Centripetal force is given by:
F=mv2
Thus for particles following the circular curve through the
electromagnet to emerge on a path to the detector:
Bqv = mv?
As the force on the charged particle is always at right angles to
the direction of its velocity, it acts as a centripetal force, and the
particle follows a circular path. As the charged particle's velocity
is constantly changing along a circular path, it is being accelerated
by the magnetic field. This means that given the right combination
of conditions, a moving charged particle could be held by a
magnetic field, continuously orbiting a central point. This is the
principle by which artificially generated anti-matter is contained,
to save it from annihilation, for future use or study.
The mass spectrometer
which rearranges to: m =D
9_v
The charge/mass ratio will identify the particles involved, so with
Band r(the radius of the curvature of the particle through the
mass spectrometer) known from the calibration of the machine, all
we need to know is how fast the particles were moving when they
entered the electromagnet. They are accelerated to this speed by an
electric field acting on their charge, and the kinetic energy gained
comes from the potential difference, V, that they pass through
according to
my2 = 9V
2qV
which gives: v=Vm
Substituting this into our equation for the charge/mass ratio:
9_20V/m
m Br
Squaring gives:
92 29V/m
Learning tip
The content in this section has been included to illustrate how
different areas of physics can be brought together in one experiment
to solve a problem. It is not required by the specification.
B2,2
Scientists often need to identify unknown chemicals. This is
particularly important, for example, in the field of forensic science,
where a crime scene technician will take a sample of unknown
material which they need to identify A machine called a mass
spectrometer (fig D) can separate chemicals according to their
charge/mass ratio, which allows unique identification of each
substance within a sample.
m 29V/m
m2 9 * B2,2
9- 2V
7.3
field will then determine whether it slows up the falling magnet
or repels it faster down the tube. If the latter were the case, then
the magnet would end up with more kinetic energy than the
gravitational potential it had at the start. This is impossible and so
the law of conservation of energy dictates Lenz's law:
The direction of an induced e.m.f. is such as to oppose the change
creating it.
In this way the e.m.f. induced in the tube acts to try and slow
down the magnet, as the movement of the magnet is the change
creating this e.m.f. The induced current around the copper
tube acts as an electromagnet, and the polarity of this induced
magnetic field is opposite to that of the falling magnet, so it slows
up the magnet's fall.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Zora has a wire coil of 120 circular turns with a radius of 5 cm, held
in a magnetic field with a strength of 20 mT. She removes it from
within the magnetic field to a place completely outside the field in
0.02 s. What em.f. is induced in her coil?
Area, A = 7 * (0.05)2 = 7.85 x 10-3 m2
D = BA = 0.02 x (7.85 x 10-3) = 1.6 10-4 Wb
Flux-linkage = N = 120 x 1.6 x 10-4 = 1.88 x 10-2Wb-turns
This is completely removed in 0.02 s.
-A(NO) -(-1.88 x 10-2)
At
0.02
E = 0.94 V
Did you know?
Questions
Fleming's right hand rule
The direction of an induced e.m.f. can be found using Fleming's right
hand rule (fig D). This is very similar to the left hand rule for the
motor effect. The reason that the opposite hand is needed is a
product of Lenz's law, in that the induced e.m.f. must be in a
direction which opposes the change producing it.
(a) What is the flux linkage if a square coil with 10 cm sides and
having 500 turns interacts with a magnetic field, B = 0.33 mT?
(b) The coil is turned through 90% within the 0.33 mT magnetic
field, moving from a position perpendicular to the field (full flux
linkage) to a position parallel to the field (zero flux linkage). This
action takes 12 ms. What is the induced e.m.f. in the coil?
(c) How would Lenz's law cause the induced current to affect the
movement?
motion
2
The graph shown in fig E is a trace of induced e.m.f against time as
a magnet is dropped through a coil of wire.
400-
300
field
Voltage/mV
0.1
Time/s
induced e.mf.
fig D Fleming's right hand rule tells us the direction of an induced e.m.f.
-400
fig E
(a) Describe the trace obtained.
(b) If the coil were connected in series to a light bulb, explain how
the current through the bulb would vary over time.
Calculating induced e.m.f.s
Putting Faraday's and Lenz's laws together gives us an expression
for calculating an induced e.mf:
-d(NO)
-A(NO)
do or E= -
Faraday's law told us that the e.m.f would be proportional to the
rate of change of flux linkage, and the minus sign in the equation
comes from Lenz's law, to indicate the opposing direction.
Key definitions
Lenz's law is that the direction of an induced e.m.f. is such as to
oppose the change creating it.
Faraday's law says that induced e.m.f. is proportional to the rate of
change of flux linkage.
7.3
2
Electric motors
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
apply Fleming's left hand rule to current-carrying conductors in a magnetic field
Fleming's left hand rule
Magnetic fields can affect moving electric charges, as well as magnetic poles. If you place a wire in
a magnetic field and pass a current through it, the wire will feel a force on it (fig A). This is called the
motor effect. The effect is greatest when the wire and the magnetic field are at right angles. In this
instance, the force will be at right angles to both, in the third dimension, as shown by Fleming's left
hand rule in fig B.
field
fig A The jumping wire experiment illustrates the motor effect in action.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Look at the diagram in fig C in which a wire connected to a cell is placed in a magnetic field. In what
direction will the wire experience a force?
fig B Fleming's left hand rule gives
the relative directions of the
field, current and movement in
the motor effect.
fig C Fleming's left hand rule in action.
The conventional current will flow from the positive end of the cell, so within the magnetic field, as
observed in fig D, it will be moving away from us. With the magnetic field from north to south (towards
the right in fig D), Fleming's left hand rule tells us that the wire will feel a force pushing it downwards.
current
force
fig D
This wire will feel a downwards force.
66
Electromagnetic effects
7.3
Flux linkage
The interaction between magnetic fields and charged particles, or conductors, allows motors to
operate, and electricity to be generated. In most practical applications, magnetic flux is made to
interact with a coil of wire, as the effect on a single strand of wire is too small to be useful. If the
single wire is coiled up, then the magnetic field can interact with each turn on the coil, and so any
effect is multiplied N times, where N is the number of turns on the coil.
The amount of magnetic flux interacting with a coil of wire is known as the flux linkage, and is
simply the product of the number of turns of wire and the flux in that region:
Flux linkage = No measured in weber
Remembering that “ = BA means that we also have:
Flux linkage = BAN
WORKED EXAMPLE
Zora takes a wire and winds it into a coil of ten circular turns with a radius of 5 cm and then holds this in
a magnetic field with a strength of 20 mT. What is the flux linkage?
Area, A = 7 * (0.05)2 = 7.85 x 10-3 m2
Flux-linkage = BAN = 0.02 * (7.85 x 10-) 10
Flux-linkage = 1.6 x 10-3Wb
Questions
The Earth acts as a giant bar magnet, and currently the geographic North Pole is at the magnetic south
end of the field.
(a) Draw a sketch of the Earth with its magnetic field.
(b) Explain where you would expect the Earth's magnetic flux density to be the greatest.
2 In Britain, the Earth's magnetic flux density is 50 000 nT, with the field close to horizontal.
(a) Estimate the flux passing through your body if you stand vertically and face north.
(b) A typical smartphone compass uses a small magnetometer chip to determine which way the
phone is facing. Such chips are typically 2 mm by 2 mm squares. If you held a smartphone so the
magnetometer chip was at an angle of 20° to the horizontal, what would be the flux passing through
the chip for it to measure?
3
In an electric motor, a permanent magnet of flux density 18.4 mT has its field placed perpendicular to a
coil of 250 turns of copper wire. The diameter of the coil is 8.50 cm. What is the flux linkage between the
field and the coil?
Kev definitions
Poles are the magnetic equivalent of a charge on a particle: north pole or south pole.
A magnetic field is a region of space that will cause a magnetic pole to feel a force.
Magnetic flux is an alternative phrase referring to magnetic field lines.
Magnetic flux density is the ratio of magnetic flux to the area it is passing through.
Tesla (T) is the unit for magnetic flux density, or magnetic field strength.
Weber, Wb is the unit of measurement of magnetic flux, 9, (and magnetic flux linkage, No).
Magnetic field strength is an alternative phrase for magnetic flux density.
Flux linkage is the amount of magnetic flux interacting with a coil of wire.
65
7.3
4.
Generating electricity
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
describe the factors affecting the e.m.f. induced in a coil when
there is relative motion between the coil and a permanent
magnet
describe how Lenz's law can predict the direction of an
induced e.m.f. as a consequence of energy conservation
• define Faraday's law, and be able to use the equation
Investigation
Investigating Faraday's law
You can investigate Faraday's law using a magnet and a coil of wire
connected to a voltage datalogger, as shown in fig B, or more simply.
using the set up in fig A.
)
€ = -d/N
dt
fig B Measuring the induced e.m.f. as a magnet falls through a coil of wire.
Electromagnetic induction
We have seen that the movement of a charged particle in a
magnetic field causes it to feel a force. Newton's third law of
motion reminds us that this force must have a counterpart that
acts equally in the opposite direction. Moreover, this pair of
electromagnetic forces is generated whenever there is relative
motion between a charge and a magnetic field. Thus, a magnetic
field moving past a stationary charge will create the same force.
The velocity term in the expression F = Bqv actually refers to the
relative (perpendicular) velocity between the magnetic field lines
and q. (Also remember that if the movement is not at right angles.
then we need to work out the component of it that is at right
angles by including the sin term: F= Bqvsin 6.)
This means that if we move a magnet near a wire, the electrons
in the wire will feel a force tending to make them move through
the wire. This is an e.m.f; if the wire is in a complete circuit, then
the electrons will move, forming an electric current. We can use
this principle to generate electricity. Reversing the direction of the
magnetic field, or the direction of the relative motion, will reverse
the direction of the force on the electrons, reversing the polarity
of the e.m.f.. Faraday's law states that the induced e.mf is
proportional to the rate of change of flux linkage.
Lenz's law
If you drop a magnet down a copper tube, it falls more slowly
than if you drop a similarly sized non-magnetic piece of metal
through it. As copper is not a magnetic material, the friction forces
should be identical on the two falling objects. This somewhat
bizarre result is a product of Lenz's law.
DO
fig C Lenz's law slows a magnet falling down a copper tube.
Imagine the copper tube is like a series of coils of copper wire all
stacked on top of each other. As the magnet falls through the tube,
it will induce an e.m.f. in each copper circlet, which will cause a
small current to flow around the tube. This circling current will
then generate an electromagnetic field, which will interact with
the falling magnet. The direction of this newly created magnetic
fig A Relative movement between a wire and a magnetic field will induce
an e.m.f.
Electromagnetic effects
7.3
Learning tin
If a current is parallel to a magnetic field, there is no force.
Investigation
Build your own motor
The forced movement of a current-carrying conductor within a
magnetic field is the fundamental principle that causes motors to
work. From Fleming's left hand rule, it is clear that if a coil of wire
carrying a current were placed in a magnetic field it would feel a
turning force, as the current travels in opposite directions on
opposite sides of the coil, thus causing forces in opposite directions,
tending to rotate the coil. If it is free to move, then the coil (or
motor) will spin continuously. If replicating the apparatus in fig E,
remember to use a low power DC supply
fig G The tiniest motor possible? Built by researchers at the Cockrell School of
Engineering at The University of Texas, this was the smallest, fastest and
longest-running tiny synthetic motor in 2014.
Moving systems on a molecular scale have also been produced by
other groups of scientists using chemical systems to generate the
forces, but the motors shown in fig F and fig G are the smallest to
use electromagnetic forces as explained in this section.
Questions
| Describe the use of Fleming's left hand rule.
Copy the diagrams in fig Hand draw an arrow to show the direction
of any force acting on the wire in each case.
fig E Motors obey Fleming's left hand rule.
(a)
(b)
The tiniest motor in the world?
There was some amazement amongst scientists when the
University of Berkeley in California produced an electric
motor which was little more than 100 pm across. However, this
'micromotor' now seems like a lumbering clunky giant, when
compared with the Berkeley lab's 'nanomotor'; in 2003, the same
Zettl Lab at Berkeley produced a motor which was less than
500 nanometres across. In 2014, the Cockrell School of Engineering
at the University of Texas built a motor of similar tiny size, but
rotated it faster and for longer than any previous nanomotor.
fig H
Many real motors use electromagnets to create the magnetic
field that causes their rotor to spin. Give one advantage and one
disadvantage of building a motor which uses electromagnets rather
than permanent magnets.
Kev definitions
Motor effect is the phenomenon that a wire carrying a current, held
within a magnetic field, will experience a force.
Fleming's left hand rule is a system for determining the direction of
the force generated by the motor effect.
fig F Computer generated image of a nanomotor - a tiny gold rotor spins on a
carbon nanotube axle. The entire set-up would fit within one wavelength
of red light. (Courtesy Zetti Research Group, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory and University of California at Berkeley).
7.3
5
Alternating current
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define the terms frequency, period, peak value and root-
mean-square value when applied to alternating currents and
potential differences
• use the equations Ves = Wand Img = 0
• describe the factors affecting the e.m.f. induced in a coil when
there is a change in another coil linked with this coil
Output
Mains electricity
In Section 7.3.4, we saw how an e.m.f can be induced by
changing the magnetic flux linkage with a conductor. If this is
extended to a coil which is made to rotate continuously in the
magnetic field, as in fig A, the e.mf will be induced constantly,
although it will keep changing direction as the coil's position
relative to the field keeps switching back and forth.
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Time/s
fig B The cycles of an alternating current can be measured for frequency and
peak voltage or current.
cycles completed per second. In the UK, mains electricity is AC
and it has a frequency of 50 Hz. This means that power station
generators are carefully controlled, so that they rotate exactly 50
times per second.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the frequency of the AC shown in fig B?
Two complete cycle takes 0.8 seconds: T = 0.45.
f= 70.4
carbon brush
f = 2.5 Hz
slip rings
wwwwwwwwwwwww
- carbon brush
w
wwww
www
fig A An AC generator: continuously rotating this coil within the magnetic field
will induce an em.f. all the time, and so an alternating current will flow in
the circuit all the time.
In a complete circuit, the e.m.f will cause a current to flow, and
as the polarity (direction) of the e.m.f. is constantly switching,
the current will keep changing direction. This can be seen on the
graph shown in fig B, where the y-axis labelled 'output' could, with
appropriate units, refer either to the e.m.f across the bulb or the
current through it.
Peak values
As alternating current follows a sinusoidal waveform, its value is
constantly changing. If we start at zero, it rises to a peak value,
drops back through zero to negative values, reaching a maximum
negative value and then returns to zero, before repeating the cycle
again and again. This idea is true whether we are considering the
voltage or the current - they both follow the same wave shape.
The maximum value, regardless of sign, is called the peak value,
and we can measure the peak current, 10, or the peak voltage,
V. In the UK, the peak voltage of mains electricity is about
+325 V. The peak current value will depend on the actual circuit in
use, following Ohm's law.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Measuring AC
Fig B shows us that alternating current follows a waveform, and
the same cycle will repeat continuously.
What is the peak voltage of the AC shown in fig B, if the y-axis scale
is 0.5 volts per square?
The waveform rises vertically a maximum of four squares above
zero, and drops at most two squares below zero.
Vo = 4 x 0.5
Vo = 2.0V
Frequency
As with any waveform, we can measure the time period for one
complete cycle, and the reciprocal of this will be the frequency.
The frequency is measured in hertz (Hz) and is the number of
1.3
Investigation
Investigating AC with an oscilloscope
An oscilloscope is essentially a voltmeter that gives measurements
over an extended period of time.
Aims and Vrms. These values allow direct comparison with DC as
they will deliver the same amount of energy as a DC with the
same value.
V
ITTS
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the rms voltage of the AC mains electricity in the UK?
Wome V0 - 325
22
Vrms = 230 V
This is the normally stated voltage value for UK mains electricity.
fig C A cathode ray oscilloscope measuring an AC voltage.
The voltage reading is shown on the screen by a small dot. The
vertical position of the dot indicates the voltage value. As time goes
by, the dot is automatically moved from left to right across the
screen, so that if the voltage reading changes over time, we will be
able to see the changing height of the dot's trace on the screen. If the
dot moves fast enough, it will blur into a continuous line trace.
Learning tip
Root-mean-square values are a type of averaging technique. For an
AC waveform, we look over a whole cycle and for each value find the
square of it. Then we look at all these squared answers (which will all
be positive) and find the mean average of them. Finally, take the
square root of that average, and we have the 'root-of-the-mean-of-
the-squares' - 'root-mean-square'. You will see this comes up again
for the average speed of molecules in a gas sample, in Section 9.1.2.
5 ms/div
Voltage/mV
time base
10 mV/div
Electromagnetic induction using an
electromagnet
In the previous section, the induction of e.m.f. was a result of the
relative motion between a conductor, or coil, and a permanent
magnet. The magnetic field which interacts with the coil could
just as easily be produced electrically by another coil. This is the
principle of operation of a transformer, and the coil producing the
initial magnetic field is referred to as the primary coil.
HHHH
iron core
secondary
primary
0 5 10 15 20 voltage
1cm= 1 'division
Time/ms
amplification
fig D Oscilloscope screen controls allow us to adjust for the readings we
need to measure.
The two most important controls on an oscilloscope are the time-
base (x-axis, dot speed control) and the volts-per-division (y-axis,
voltage sensitivity control). In the example in fig D, the time-base is
set at 5 ms divl, so the dot will move horizontally across the screen
at a rate of 1 square in 5 milliseconds. The voltage sensitivity is set at
10 mV div-l, so the dot will move vertically 1 square for every 10
millivolts measured. In fig D, the AC shown has a peak voltage of just
under 30 mV, and a time period of 20 ms.
IBA
magnetic field
Root-mean-square values
As the voltage and current values for AC are constantly changing,
what does it mean if we ask, "What is the voltage of this AC?' If
you look at the sinusoidal trace, you might say that on average
it was zero. Alternatively, you might choose to state the peak
value. Scientists need to have an agreed system or the resulting
confusion could lead to electrocution. Also, we need to be able
to compare alternating current with direct current. DC has the
voltage and current values constant and always in the same
direction. Unless peak values are stated, the voltage and current
values of alternating currents are the root-mean-square values,
74
fig E Using an electromagnet to induce e.m.f. in a coil.
In fig E we have a pair of coils linked together by a soft iron
core. Iron is extremely good at carrying magnetism and, in the
set-up shown, virtually all the magnetic field generated by the
primary coil on the left would interact with the secondary coil
on the right. When the primary switch is first closed, the primary
suddenly produces a magnetic field that was not previously there.
This means that a changing magnetic field is now within the
secondary coil. This sudden change of flux linkage will generate
an e.m.f. in the secondary. However, once the electromagnetic
field is stable there will no longer be any change in flux linkage
over time, and so there will be no further induced e.mn.f in the
secondary. The voltmeter needle will kick and then return to zero.
7.3
Magnetic forces
WORKED EXAMPLE
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
use the equation F = BIL sin, for a current-carrying conductor
in a magnetic field
apply Fleming's left hand rule to charged particles moving in
a magnetic field
Hannah sets up a jumping wire demonstration to impress her
younger cousin. She uses a wire with a current of 2 A running
through it, and a pair of Magnadur magnets that have a magnetic
field of 0.5 ml. She is not too careful in setting up and 5 cm of the
wire actually hangs across the field at an angle of 80°. How much
force does Hannah's wire experience? And, if it has a mass of
9 grams, how fast will it initially accelerate?
F = Bilsin 0 = 0.5 x 10-3x 2 x 0.05 * sin 80
F = 4.92 x 105N
use the equation F = Bqvsing, for a charged particle moving in
a magnetic field
Fred = BIL
a =
- 4.92 x 10-5
am 0.009
a = 5.5 x 10-3ms 2
Investigation
WP
Investigating the magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor
You can investigate how much force will be on a wire subjected to
the motor effect. In the experiment shown in fig A, it is easy to alter
the current through the wire, the length that is within the magnetic
field, and the angle it cuts across the field.
A consequence of the expression F= BIL is that a motor can be
made more powerful, or faster, by:
increasing the current through the motor (1)
increasing the number of turns of wire in the motor (L)
• increasing the magnetic field within the motor (B).
86 76
The magnetic field strength is usually maximised by making the
coil's core out of soft iron. Some motors use electromagnets to
provide the field, and these could be strengthened by increasing
the current through them.
F = Bev
The motor effect happens because a charged particle moving at
right angles to a magnetic field feels a force on it at right angles to
its direction of motion and also at right angles to the field. If the
charged particle is constrained - like an electron in a current in
a wire – then the force will be transferred to the wire itself. If the
particle is flying freely, its direction will change and it will travel a
circular path whilst in the magnetic field (fig B).
fig A Investigating the strength of the force on a current-carrying
conductor in a magnetic field.
The strength of the force, F, on a wire which has a current,
1, through it whilst it is in a magnetic field, B, is given by the
equation:
F=Bx/xL x sino
where L is the length of the wire within the field, and is the
angle the current makes with the lines of the magnetic field. For
simplicity, we will only consider uniform magnetic fields in which
the field lines are all parallel.
It is common to set up situations in which the angle is 90° so
that sin is a maximum and equals 1. This reduces the formula
to F= BIL which is commonly remembered by students as
Fred = BIL.
fig B Charged particles moving in a magnetic field follow a circular path as the
motor effect provides a centripetal force.
The strength of the force on a charged particle moving across a
magnetic field is given by the equation:
F=BXqXv X sin
68
7.3
1
Magnetic fields
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. define the terms magnetic flux density, B, magnetic flux, o,
and flux linkage, Nø
calculate flux, flux density and flux linkage
jump to one of its ends - as the attraction is stronger towards
the end. The quantity of flux, ” (
measured in weber, Wb),
through any given area indicates the strength of the effect of
the field there. This can be determined for a particular region by
multiplying the area enclosed by the region by the component of
Aux density perpendicular to the area.
= B sind x A
If the magnetic flux is in a uniform direction and lies
perpendicular to the area in question, sin 90º = 1, and the
equation simplifies to:
p = BA
WORKED EXAMPLE
Magnetic flux
In Section 7.1.1 we saw how an electric field can be represented
by lines that indicate how a charge will feel a force when placed in
the field. You are probably more familiar, though, with the everyday
effects of magnetic fields such as attracting a fridge with a magnetic
souvenir. Usually the fridge magnet moves towards the fridge rather
than the other way around, but Newton's third and second laws
of motion explain this outcome. Electric and magnetic fields are
very similar (and utterly intertwined) beasts, as we saw in Book 1,
Topic 5 with the nature of electromagnetic radiation.
Where an electric field affects charges, a magnetic field affects
poles. A region of space that will cause a magnetic pole to feel a
force is called a magnetic field.
(a)
/7
+ 11
- area A
1
fig B Magnetic flux contained in a small region, A.
(a) If the bar magnet in fig B(a) causes a magnetic field with a flux
density of 20 mT perpendicular to the plane of area A, how
much flux will be contained by this area if it is 10 cm??
A = 10 cm2 = 10 x 10-4m
0 = B x A = 20 x 10-3 x 10 x 10-4
D = 20 x 10-5Wb
(b) In fig B(b) the uniform magnetic field has a flux density of
5x 10-5T and is at an angle of 75° to the region of area A.
How much flux will be contained by this area if it is 1 cm??
A= 1 cm² = 1 x 10-4m2
= B sin 0 x A = 5x 10-5 * sin 75° x 1 x 10-4
0 = 4.8 x 10-9Wb
fig A A magnetic field around a permanent bar magnet.
When we represent a magnetic field in a diagram, the field lines
show the direction in which a lone north pole will be pushed.
In reality, poles always exist in north and south pairs, but the
convention is to take the field as acting from north to south, and
this is the direction of arrows drawn onto magnetic field lines
(also called lines of magnetic flux). Like electric field patterns,
indeed like all field patterns, the closer the lines are together,
the stronger the field is. The term referring to the strength of a
magnetic field is the magnetic flux density, B, and the SI unit for
it is the tesla (T)
Looking at fig B, you can see that the field lines all go in and
out of the ends of the bar magnet. This forces them to be closer
together at those points, which means that the field is stronger
there. This is why a paperclip picked up by a bar magnet would
Magnetic flux density
In the situation where the flux is perpendicular to the area we
are considering, a rearrangement of the equation shows why the
quantity B is known as the magnetic flux density:
B=P
By sharing the flux over the area, B indicates how closely packed
the magnetic field lines are - how dense they are. How dense field
lines are indicates how strong the field is, so B is also known as the
magnetic field strength.
64
7.3 Exam-style questions
[Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
5 Faraday's and Lenz's laws are summarised in the list of
formulae as
d(No)
(a) State the meaning of the term No.
(b) Explain the significance of the minus sign.
[2]
[3]
[Total: 5]
1 A beam of electrons carries 100 billion electrons 18 centimetres
per second. The beam enters a magnetic field of 40 mt at right
angles to the field. How much force does each electron feel?
A 1.15 x 10-21 N
B 1.15 x 10-19 N
C 1.15 x 10-18 N
D 1.15 x 10-10N
[Total: 1]
6 A vinyl disc is used to store music. When the disc is played, a
stylus (needle) moves along in a groove in the disc. The disc
rotates, and bumps in the groove cause the stylus to vibrate.
[1]
coil
vinyl disc
.
W
iron strips
K.
2 A 230 V alternating e.mf drives a current through a 4700 12
resistor. What is the rms current through the resistor.
A 0.035 A
B 0.049 A
C 0.069 A
D 14.4 A
[1]
[Total: 1]
..
magnet
stylus
3 When a magnet is moved into a coil of 50 turns at 0.12 ms!,
an e.m.f. of 3.60 V is generated in the coil. What will be the
e.m.f. generated when the magnet is removed from the coil at
0.48 ms-l?
A -0.90 V
B 0.90 V
C -14.4 V
D 14.4 V
[Total: 1]
[1]
The stylus is attached to a small magnet, which is near to a coil
of wire. When the stylus vibrates, there is a potential difference
across the terminals of the coil.
(a) Explain the origin of this potential difference.
(b) The potential difference is then amplified and sent to a
loudspeaker. Long-playing vinyl discs (LPs) have to be
rotated at 33 rpm (revolutions per minute) so that the
encoded bumps in the groove lead to the correct sound
frequencies.
(i) Calculate the angular velocity of an LP.
(ii) As the stylus moves towards the centre of the LP the
encoded bumps must be fitted into a shorter length of
groove.
Explain why the encoding of bumps in the groove
becomes more compressed as the stylus moves
towards the centre.
[3]
[Total: 9]
[2]
4 The diagram shows a horizontal wire which is at right angles
to a magnetic field. The magnetic field is produced by a
horseshoe magnet, which is on a balance adjusted to read zero
when the current in the wire is zero.
- length of wire
in field
- magnet
0.8
balance
When the current is 4 A, the reading on the balance is 0.8 gram.
The length of wire in the magnetic field is 0.05 m.
Calculate the average magnetic flux density along the length of
the wire.
[3]
[Total: 3]
78
Thinking Bigger
| 7.3
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this paper.
Cowy
1. The extract consists of information from a technical paper written for a metal detector
manufacturer's customers. Why, then, is there no obvious commercial bias in the text?
2. Discuss the level of scientific detail included in the extract, and the level of language
used, particularly considering the intended audience.
Although a technical paper,
this was presented in a
brochure-style format for
Minelab's customers.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
UW00w
3. Explain how a metal detector functions, including references to Faraday's law and
Lenz's law.
4. a. Explain how the operation of the metal detector is similar to that of a transformer.
b. Explain how the metal detector is different from a transformer.
5. Why does the signal from the receive coil need to be amplified electronically?
6. If the target metal has a lower resistivity, it produces a stronger detection signal. Explain
why a gold wedding ring might be easier to detect than a naturally occurring gold
nugget of a similar size.
Consider how a
transformer manages to
transmit nearly all the
power from its primary
coil to its secondary
coil; and then compare
with the structure of
this device.
Activity
Imagine Minelab have been asked to give a presentation about their portable metal detectors to a group
of amateur treasure hunters. Prepare the part of the presentation which explains why some objects are
more easily detected than others. You should cover size, shape, proximity and resistivity. Diagrams should
be included in your presentation.
Do not attempt to teach
them A level physics -
your presentation should
explain the principles
without overcomplicated
detail.
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
77
What have I studied before?
• Magnetic field rules for attraction and repulsion
• Electric current as the movement of charge
• The effects of electric fields on charges
• Resolving vectors
The centripetal force equation
Conservation of energy
What will I study later?
• Alpha particle deflections from nuclei
The structure and functioning of particle
accelerators
The detection and identification of subatomic
particles by magnetic deflection
Magnetic storage of charged particles, including
anti-matter
Root-mean-square calculations of gas molecule
speeds
Nuclear fusion requires magnetic particle
containment
What will I study in this chapter?
How to explain the strength of a magnetic field
The effects of electric and magnetic fields on the
movement of charged particles
• How electricity can be generated
• How to calculate the amount and direction of
induced e.m.f.
How to measure alternating currents and voltages
63
Electromagnetic effects
7.3
Transformers
If the primary circuit is switched off, the magnetic field it produces
will suddenly disappear, and a brief e.m.f. will be induced in the
opposite direction to the switch-on voltage. The voltmeter needle
will kick in the opposite direction and then return to zero again.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Learning tip
The content in this section has been included to illustrate how
different areas of physics can be brought together in one experiment
to solve a problem. It is not required by the specification.
The iron core in fig E has a square cross-section with each side
4 cm. The primary produces a magnetic field with a strength of
0.5 T. This takes 60 ms to generate, and to die away, when the
primary circuit is switched on or off. The secondary coil has
120 turns. What e.m.f. would be induced in the secondary at the
moments of switch-on and switch-off of the primary circuit?
-d(N) -A(N) -A(BAN)
dt At
-(0.5 * 0.042 * 120)
60 x 10-3
E = -1.6 V
At
At switch-off, the e.m.f. induced would be the same amount but in
the opposite direction, so ε = 1.6 V.
The circuit and situation described above is not really of much
practical use, although it can be responsible for current surges in
circuitry, which can cause damage. The same principle is more
usefully applied in the transformer, in which an alternating current
is supplied to the primary. As this current constantly varies, the
electromagnetic field produced by the primary coil alternates,
which creates a varying induced e.m.f. in the secondary. This e.m.f.
will vary at the same rate as the AC supplied to the primary. It will
also change constantly depending on the varying rate of change
of flux linkage. This comes from the strength of the magnetic field
(which in turn depends on the number of turns on the primary
coil) and the number of turns on the secondary coil. It turns
out that the ratio of voltages between primary and secondary is
identical to the ratio of the number of turns on these coils:
V primary primary
Vsecondary secondary
This gives us the essential job of a transformer which is to
change voltage. More turns on the secondary means a step-up
transformer in which the output voltage is higher than the input
voltage and vice versa for a step-down transformer.
The magnetic field is The induced voltage in the
almost totally contained secondary coil is given by
in the iron core.
Faraday's law: V = -NA
Questions
| From the oscilloscope readings in fig D:
(a) What is the frequency of the AC?
(b) If the peak voltage is 28 mV, what is the rms voltage?
(c) How would the trace change if:
(i) the time-base is changed to 10 ms divi?
(ii) the voltage sensitivity is changed to 5 mV divi?
A
A transformer for å toy train set converts the mains supply from
230 V down to 6V to operate the model train. The transformer that
makes this conversion has 160 turns on its secondary coil. How
many primary turns does the transformer have?
w
w
3
Part of the train set in question 2 has a resistance of 5600 and is
connected in parallel to the 6V output from the transformer.
(a) What is the peak voltage from the transformer's 6 Vrms output?
(b) What are the rms and peak currents through this part of the
train set?
magnetic field
A current in the primary iron core
coil produces a magnetic
field, like a solenoid.
fig F How a transformer can change voltage
WORKED EXAMPLE
Kev definitions
Peak value is the maximum value, regardless of sign, of a sinusoidal
graph, such as that for alternating current.
Peak current is the maximum value, regardless of sign, of an
alternating current
Peak voltage is the maximum voltage value, regardless of sign, of an
alternating current.
A primary coil is the first coil in a transformer, in which the supply
current passes.
A secondary coil is the second coil in a transformer, in which the
output current passes.
A local substation of the National Grid changes the voltage down
from 11 kV to 415 V. If the primary coil in this transformer has
8000 turns, how many will be needed on the secondary to give the
correct output voltage?
Vprimary primary
Vsecondary Nsecondary
11 x 103 8x 103
415 secondary
8 x 103 415
Nsecondary
11 x 102
Nsecondary = 302 turns
TOPIC 7
Electric and magnetic fields
CHAPTER
7.3
Electromagnetic effects
Introduction
Industrial electricity generation is vital in our technological world. Virtually every device is electrically powered these
WP days, so the physics behind generating electricity is vital. Electric and magnetic fields are utterly intertwined
phenomena. Changing one either automatically generates or changes the other. However, the details of how to
maximise these effects are subtle and important.
As with all physical phenomena, the conservation of energy is paramount, and this affects the conversion of movement into
electricity. However, electrical energy being transferred into kinetic energy is also hugely important in today's world. This is
essentially the inverse effect to the generation of electricity, and we will look at it in this chapter too. Other machines such as
particle accelerators and mass spectrometers are also affected by the equations involved in this chapter, so we will highlight the
connections to these.
Finally, we will combine these effects to look a little beyond the examination specification when considering the functioning of
electrical transformers. Their interconversion of energy from electric current into magnetic fields and back again is the closest
people have come to creating a perfectly efficient machine.
All the maths you need
• Recognising and use of appropriate units (e.g. the tesla)
• Substituting numerical values into equations (e.g. calculate magnetic flux linkage)
• Understanding the slope of a tangent to a curve as a measure of the rate of change (e.g. induced e.m.f. as the rate of change
of magnetic flux linkage)
• Use of angles in 2D and 3D structures (e.g. finding the magnetic flux linkage when a coil area is at an angle to the magnetic
field direction)
• Distinguishing between instantaneous and average rates of change (e.g. comparing the e.m.f. induced at different times as a
magnet falls through a coil)
62
THINKING
BIGGER
METAL DETECTIVES
Detecting metal objects using a process involving electromagnetic induction was first proposed by
Alexander Graham Bell, also the inventor of the telephone, as a means to find the bullet within the
body of dying US President James Garfield after he had been shot by an assassin. The bullet was
not found, but the invention of the metal detector was one positive outcome of President Garfield's
demise.
METAL DETECTORS BASICS AND THEORY
their generated magnetic field is different from the transmitted
magnetic field in shape and strength. It is the altered shape of this
regenerated magnetic field that metal detectors use to detect metal
targets. (The different shape' may be in the form of a time delay.)
The regenerated magnetic field from the eddy currents causes an
alternating voltage signal at the receive coil. This is amplified by
the electronics because relatively deeply buried targets produce
signals in the receive coil which can be millions of times weaker
than the signal in the transmit coil, and thus need to be amplified to
a reasonable level for the electronics to be able to process.
In summary:
fig A Electromagnetic induction can save lives by finding buried explosives.
Metal detectors work on the principle of transmitting a
magnetic field and analysing a return signal from the target and
environment. The transmitted magnetic field varies in time,
usually at rates of fairly high-pitched audio signals. The magnetic
transmitter is in the form of a transmit coil with a varying electric
current flowing through it produced by transmit electronics. The
receiver is in the form of a receive coil connected to receive and
signal processing electronics. The transmit coil and receive coil are
sometimes the same coil. The coils are within a coil housing which
is usually simply called the coil', and all the electronics are within
the electronics housing attached to the coil via an electric cable
and commonly called the 'control box'.
This changing transmitted magnetic field causes electric currents
to flow in metal targets. These electric currents are called eddy
currents, which in turn generate a weak magnetic field, but
1 Transmit signal from the electronics causes transmit electrical
current in transmit coil.
2 Electrical current in the transmit coil causes a transmitted
magnetic field.
3 Transmitted magnetic field causes electrical currents to flow in
metal targets (called eddy currents).
4 Eddy currents generate a magnetic field. This field is altered
compared to the transmitted field.
5 Receive coil detects the magnetic field generated by eddy
currents as a very small voltage.
6 Signal from receive coil is amplified by receive electronics,
then processed to extract signal from the target, rather than
signals from other environment magnetic sources such as
Earth's magnetic field.
From a paper written by Bruce Candy, Chief Scientist, Minelab Electronics,
a manufacturer of metal detectors. https://www.minelab.com/_files/f/11043/
METAL DETECTOR BASICS AND THEORY.pdf.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1
6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2
YOU ARE
HERE
8.1
76
