Electrical quantities
3.1
fall as the temperature rises. Table A below shows how the density of conduction electrons, n in the
transport equation, explains why the resistivity of metals is so much lower than for semiconductors.
The negative temperature coefficients of resistivity for semiconductors show that their resistivity falls
as the temperature goes up. The reason for this is that the value for n in the transport equation will
be higher at higher temperatures (see also Section 3.1.6). So the fact that the resistivity goes down
is actually just a consequence of the fact that these materials, like silicon, conduct better at higher
temperatures.
Material
Copper
Aluminium
Silicon
Germanium
n/m? (at 20°C)
8.42 x 1028
18.2 x 1028
8.49 x 1015
1.56 x 1019
n/m-3 (at 50°C)
8.27 x 1028
17.9 x 1028
7.42 x 1017
6.82 x 1020
table A The number of charge carriers for some common materials, at room temperature and at a higher temperature.
A slight decrease in n for metals at higher temperatures is due to their thermal expansion, rather
than any change in the number of available conduction electrons. It is not nearly as significant
as the increase in collisions between metal atoms and conduction electrons caused by increased
thermal vibrations.
Questions
| What is meant by the 'drift velocity' of conduction electrons in a metal?
2 For an aluminium wire at room temperature with a diameter of 0.40 mm, calculate the electrons' drift
velocity when a current of 2.2 A passes through the wire.
3
Explain why the resistance of a wire is greater if the wire is longer.
4 Develop a model to explain conduction and resistance in metals. Your explanation should include
reference to at least the following ideas:
movement of charge carriers
fixed lattice ions
collisions between ions and charge carriers
• increased vibrations of fixed lattice ions with temperature
an evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of your model.
5
Estimate the number of free conduction electrons in a penny coin.
Key definitions
The slow overall movement of the charges in a current is called their drift velocity.
The transport equation is I = nAvg. This defines electric current, I, from a fundamental basis. It is the
product of charge carriers, n; the charge on those carriers, q; the cross-sectional area of the conductor, A;
and the drift velocity of the charge carriers in that conductor, V.
What have I studied before?
- Atomic structure, and electrical conduction by
electrons
- When electrical charges attract or repel
• Conservation of electrical charge
... What we mean by 'current and by 'voltage, and
how these are measured
• The Ohm's law equation
Electrical resistance and its effects
The variation in current with changing potential
difference, for various components
What will I study later?
• How electrical properties are affected by the
design of the circuit in which they are being
measured
How the conservation of charge, and the
conservation of energy affect the distribution of
currents and voltages around circuits
How resistances can be combined and separated
in series and parallel circuits
How internal resistance can affect the usefulness
of an electrical supply
How to calculate the transfer of electrical energy,
power, and the efficiency of an electrical device
or circuit
The causes of forces on electrically charged
particles
The structures and effects of electrical fields
(A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
• Atomic structure, and the structure of solid
materials, especially metals
• Numerical quantities of electrical charge, and the
movement of quantities of charge
Conservation of electrical charge implications for
currents
Mathematical definitions of current, voltage and
resistance
Ohm's law in general and when it is, and is not,
relevant
What affects resistance in different objects and
materials, including resistivity and
superconductivity
Why there is the variation we see in current with
changing potential difference, for various
components
65
:
3.1
Electric current
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
describe electric current as the rate of flow of charged particles
make calculations of electric current
Electric charge
WP
Some particles have an electric charge. For example, the electron has a negative charge.
In SI units, electric charge is measured in coulombs (C) and the amount of charge on a single
electron in these units is -1.6 X 10-19 C.
e = 1.6 x 10-19
This means that you would have one coulomb of negative charge if you collected together
6.25 X 1018 electrons, as shown in this calculation:
total charge, Q = ne = 6.25 x 1018 x 1.610-19 = 10
The charges on fundamental particles such as electrons are fixed properties of these particles.
It is impossible to create or destroy charge - the total charge must always be conserved.
fig A Electric current is a measure
of the rate of movement of
electric charge. Lightning strikes
can have currents of 10000
amperes.
Electric current
If electric charge moves, this is referred to as an electric current, and the strict definition of current
is the rate of movement of charge. As it is usually a physical movement of billions of tiny charged
particles, such charge movements are often said to flow. Thinking of the flow of charge like the current
in a river can be useful, and we will see later how current splits and recombines at circuit junctions in a
manner that is analogous to water flow. Moreover, as the total amount of water in a river at a given time
does not change, even if the river splits, this again illustrates the conservation of charge.
0.22
fig B We can measure electric current through a component using an ammeter connected in series.
Electric current occurs when a charged particle, which is free to move, experiences an electric force.
If it can move it will be accelerated by the force. This movement of charge forms the electric current.
Most electric circuits are made from metal wiring in which there are electrons that are free to move.
These conduction electrons then form the current.
Any source of electrical energy can create an electric force in order to produce a current. In fig C,
the cell causes the electric force experienced by the negative conduction electrons so they move
through the metal – they are attracted to the positive anode of the cell.
-
---
conventional
current
fig C Conventional current flows from positive to negative. Negative electrons would move in the opposite direction.
66
3.1
Semiconductors
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain conduction in semiconductors
explain electrical insulation
Conduction in semiconductors
Semiconductors are generally solid materials that only have small numbers of delocalised electrons
that are free to conduct. A typical example is silicon, one of the most abundant elements on Earth.
Free atoms have a series of discrete energy levels in which we can find their electrons, depending on
the energy the electrons have received (see Section 4.4.4). If the electron receives enough energy, it
will leave the atom altogether, leaving behind an ion.
In solid materials, where there are many, many atoms close together, the allowed energy levels
become much wider, forming energy bands. The electrons can have a large range of energies and
still be within the same band. There are energy amounts which are forbidden for the electrons, but
it is a very different situation from the highly limited energy levels of the isolated atom's electrons,
As these energy bands are created by the collective grouping of the solid's atoms, the bands are
attributed to the semiconductor as a whole rather than to individual atoms. There is an energy
level called the valence band Electrons with this amount of energy remain tied to atoms and do
not form part of any electric current. Those that gain energy to jump up to the conduction band
become delocalised and can move through the semiconductor as part of a current.
empty
conduction
band
almost empty
conduction
band
almost full
conduction band
valence band
full valence
band
almost full
valence band
Metal
Insulator
Semiconductor
fig A The gaps between energy bands within materials explain why they are conductors or insulators. If there is a large
energy gap, electrons will need to gain a lot of energy to leave their atoms and conduct a current.
The number of delocalised electrons in a semiconductor is low compared with metals, and so
the current they will carry is therefore lower than metals for the same applied voltage. At higher
temperatures they have more conduction electrons, as more electrons are elevated into the
conduction band. There will be a temperature-related reduction in current due to increased collisions
with fixed atoms, but the increase in available conduction electrons far outweighs this. The overall
effect is that a semiconductor will carry more current as the temperature goes up - its resistivity
effectively drops as the temperature rises.
80
TOPIC 3
Electric circuits
CHAPTER
3.1
Electrical quantities
Introduction
In 1881, the streets of Godalming in Surrey were the first in the world to be lit by a public electricity
service. The power was generated from a water wheel in a nearby river. Electricity has revolutionised
the way people live, but we have only been using it in the all-encompassing manner we do now for
about 100 years. Today, it is difficult to imagine what life would have been like when the night was not
artificially illuminated and music could only be heard if the instruments were played live.
It is extraordinary how far-reaching the use of electricity has become in such a short time, and just how
difficult it might be for us today to try and adapt to life without electricity. Arguably, the first electrical
battery was built by Alessandro Volta in 1800. A little over 200 years later, almost everything around you
will either use electricity directly or would have been impossible to manufacture without the availability of
electricity.
In this chapter, you will learn about the fundamental electrical quantities that can be measured and how
they are related to each other, along with the essential material structures that allow, or restrict, the flow of
electricity.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the coulomb, c)
• Calculating areas of circles (e.g. finding the cross-sectional area of a wire in order to find resistivity)
• Use of standard form and ordinary form (e.g. representing the charge on an electron)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. finding the resistivity of a material from an object's resistance)
• Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. using the transport equation)
• Determining the slope of a linear graph (e.g. finding the resistivity from experimental results)
64
3.1
The transport equation
Did you know?
For a metal, the random thermal motion of the free electrons will be
at speeds of thousands of kilometres per second, whereas the drift
velocity during conduction is usually only millimetres per second.
Investigation
Investigating conduction velocity of coloured ions
In this experiment, you can observe the movement of coloured ions
as charge carrier particles on a piece of filter paper soaked in
ammonium hydroxide solution. A crystal of copper sulfate and one
of potassium manganate(VII) will each dissolve, producing positive
blue copper ions and negative purple ions of manganate(VII).
Connecting a pd of 30 V across the wet filter paper will cause the ions
to flow slowly across it, in opposite directions, and their velocity can
be measured using a ruler and stopclock. Expect a velocity of about
1 mm per minute.
The value of the electric current in a metal can be calculated
from the fundamental movement of the electrons if we remember
the definition that I = =
_AQ
If we consider the cylinder shaded on the diagram in fig B as the
length of the wire that the charges move through in a time Ar,
then we need to calculate how much charge flows through it in
that time. There are n electrons per cubic metre of this metal, and
the wire has a cross-sectional area, A. Their movement is at a drift
velocity, v, and the distance this takes them along the wire in that
time is Ax. So: Ax= vat.
The total charge will be the number of electrons multiplied by the
charge on each, e. The number of electrons will be their density.
n, multiplied by the volume of the cylinder, V, that they travel
through in At.
... AQ = n x V xe = n < AAxxe = n < Avat xe
AQnAvAte
crystal
filter paper
i
- At
At
microscope slide
+30 V
1 = nAve
This is called the transport equation.
crocodile clip
fig C Observing the slow speed of ion movement during current flow.
Transport equation example
How fast would be the drift velocity of the electrons in a
copper wire which has a diameter of 0.22 mm and carries
a current of 0.50 A? The number density of conduction
electrons in copper, n = 8.5 x 102m-"
wire radius = 0.11 mm = 1.1 x 10-4m
cross-sectional area, A = r2 = TX (1.1 x 10-4)2 = 3.8 x 10-8 m2
I = nave
:
vande
0.50
8.5 x 1028 * 3.8 x 10-8 x 1.6 x 10-19
V = 9.67 x 10-4ms
V = 0.97 mms-1
wire at time I
a cross-section of the wire
Resistance
We have seen that whilst the natural speed of electrons within a
metal is very high, their progress through a metal's lattice of fixed
atoms is very slow. They are constantly colliding with those atoms
making their motion akin to taking 100 steps forward and 99 steps
back. This is electrical resistance. The frequency of collisions is
determined in part by the temperature, as this affects the vibration
of the fixed atoms. The higher the metal's temperature, the more
its atoms vibrate, and this means more collisions, further slowing
the drift velocity of the electrons.
However, a higher current will cause more collisions, as more
electrons move faster through the metal structure. This makes the
metal atoms vibrate more - effectively increasing the temperature.
Looking back to the I–V graph for a filament lamp, fig Cin
Section 3.1.3, we can now explain how increased current leads
to higher temperature, which leads to greater resistance, thus
causing the curve to flatten out when higher voltages try to drive
higher currents.
there are n electrons
the sea of electrons
per cubic meter of wire cross-section is moving to the right
area A
with drift speed v
The sea of electrons has moved forward a distance Ax = VAL.
The shaded volume is V= A AX
Resistivity
Table A in Section 3.1.4 showed the resistivity of various
materials, good conductors, semiconductors and insulators
(which are discussed in detail in Section 3.1.6). It also showed
how the resistivity varies with temperature for metals and
semiconductors. The resistivity of semiconductors was seen to
fig B A section of metal wire with dimensions to show how to make
calculations using the transport equation.
78
3.1
5
Conduction and resistance
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain conduction in metals
explain electrical resistance
calculate the drift velocity of conduction electrons in metals
In order to conduct electricity, solids need to have electrons that are delocalised from the solid's atoms, so
that they can move through the solid causing an overall movement of charge - a current.
Conduction in metals
The structure of metals has a regular lattice of metal atoms. These are bonded together through
the sharing of electrons, which act as if they were associated with more than one atom. Many of the
atoms also have an outer electron that is not needed for bonding between the atoms. These free
electrons have a random motion, which changes as they collide with atoms or other electrons, but on
average the overall position of all the charge in the metal is stationary. However, if a source of emf is
connected across the metal, the electric field it sets up in the metal will have a tendency to push the
negative electrons towards the positive end of the field. The slow overall movement of the electrons
is called their drift velocity.
+ + + + + + + + + + + +/
Ð°Ð°Ð + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + +
+ + + + + + + + + + +
electric field
from emf
electric field
from emf
electric field
from emf
A net displacement in the direction
of the positive side of the emf is
superimposed on the random
thermal motion.
fig A Conduction in metals happens as the free electrons add an overall movement along the direction of the voltage
across the conductor (towards the positive anode) to their random collisions and vibrations.
Electrical quantities
3.1
Calculating current
The SI unit for electric current is the ampere, A. Current can be calculated from the equation:
charge passing a point (C)
current (A) =
time for that charge to pass (s)
AQ
WP
Thus one ampere (1 A) is the movement of one coulomb (1 C) of charge per second (1 s).
For example, if the lightning strike in fig A takes 0.1 seconds to transfer 1150 coulombs of charge,
we could calculate the current in the lightning:
AQ_1150 - 11500 A
At 0.1
The equation defining electric current is often used in a rearranged form to find AQ, the amount of
charge that has moved through a component in a given time, At.
AQ = At
You could remember this as the 'Qult equation (Q = It).
Investigation
WP
Observing charge flow
We can monitor small movements of charge, to see how they form a current, using a hanging ball that will
conduct electricity
TH
fig D A suspended ball can carry small numbers of electrons across a high voltage gap, and this current is measured
using a spot galvanometer.
The high voltage set up across the air gap between the metal plates encourages negative electrons to want
to move towards the positive side. The hanging ball is painted with conducting paint and swings
backwards and forwards across the gap, ferrying a small quantity of electrons from one metal plate to the
other each time. We can measure this small movement of charge on a very sensitive ammeter. If we time
the period of oscillation of the shuttling ball and the tiny current, we can calculate how many electrons
would pass across on each journey of the ball. If the ball is shuttling too fast to be timed by eye, then we
can use a stroboscope to measure the frequency of oscillations.
Example calculation:
If the spot galvanometer registers 6.5 microamperes and the ball takes 2.0 milliseconds for one swing, how
many electrons does it carry on each pass from the negative plate to the positive one?
AQ = 1 x At = 6.5 x 10-6 x 2 x 10-3 = 13 x 10°C = 13 nC
no of electrons per swing:
M AQ 13 x 10-9
e 1.6 x 10-19
N = 8.1 x 1010 electrons
Note that on the ball's return journey it will be positively charged, having lost an excess of electrons when
contacting the positively charged plate. However, positive charge moving in the opposite direction still
constitutes a current and it will be at the same rate - the same current - because the ball speed is constant.
Electrical quantities
3.1
Current-voltage characteristics
In designing an electric circuit, we need to know how components will react when the pd
across them changes, in order to ensure that the circuit performs its intended function under all
circumstances. Part of the specification of any component is a graph of its I–V characteristics. We
have already seen the graph for a simple resistor, and a metal at constant temperature would produce
the same straight-line result. The only difference would be that the gradient will be different in each
case, as it corresponds to the specific resistance of the resistor or wire under consideration.
Current
1-V graph for a filament bulb
For the filament lamp I-V graph in fig C, we can see that for small voltages, the current is
proportional to it, as shown by the straight-line portion of the graph through the origin. At higher
voltages, a larger current is driven through the lamp filament wire, and this heats it up. At hotter
temperatures, metals have higher resistance. The gradient of the graph in fig B was given as the
reciprocal of the resistance, and thus the gradient here becomes less towards higher voltages: higher
resistance means a lower gradient. In Section 3.1.5, we will see why the resistance increases with
temperature and why this reduces current.
Potential
difference
1-V graph for a diode
Current (A)
fig C A filament lamp is an example
of a non-ohmic conductor. This
is because the current through
it affects its own temperature -
higher current means a higher
temperature - and controlling
temperature is part of the
definition of Ohm's law.
Voltage (V)
threshold voltage = 0.6V
fig D A semiconductor diode is designed to only pass current in one direction, so the line follows the x-axis, I = 0, for
negative voltages.
For the diode in fig D, we can see the basic idea that a diode only conducts in the forwards direction,
and so there is zero current for negative voltages. It also requires a minimum driving voltage in the
forwards direction. This threshold voltage is typically around 0.6 V. The curve for a diode will be looked
at in detail in Section 3.1.6, which covers the ideas of electrical conduction in different materials.
1-V graph for a thermistor
Current (A)
Voltage (V)
fig E A thermistor is designed to alter its resistance with temperature; in the reverse manner to a filament bulb.
_
3.1
3
For the thermistor in fig E, its resistance reduces with the temperature. The gradient of the line
increases with the heating effect of the increasing current. The gradient represents the reciprocal of
the resistance: larger gradient value means lower resistance. This is a result of its manufacture from
semiconductor materials, whose atoms release more conduction electrons as the temperature rises.
This will be explained in detail in Section 3.1.6.
Questions
1 State Ohm's law.
2
A buzzer in a circuit allows a current of 0.05 A to pass through it when the pd across it is 6 V. What is the
buzzer's resistance?
What is the difference between an ohmic and a non-ohmic conductor?
4 Graphs of current against voltage are usually drawn with V on the x-axis, as the experimental data
would be collected by having pd as the independent variable. This is just a convention. Considering the
resistance, why might it be more useful to plot these data with pd on the y-axis?
What is the difference between component A and component B shown in the I-V plot of fig F? Explain
your answer.
1/A
0.6-
0.24
-10.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
-0.24
10.0 V/V
Component A
- Component B
fig F 1-V graphs for two components.
Key definitions
Resistance is the opposition to the flow of electrical current. It can be calculated from the equation:
potential difference (V)
resistance (1) =
current (A)
REV
Ohm's law states that the current through a component is directly proportional to the voltage across it,
providing the temperature remains the same. The equation for this is often expressed as:
V= / xR
voltage (V) = current (A) resistance (0)
74
3.1
Ionic charge carriers
If the circuit is more unusual, there may be other charged particles, charge carriers, which can move
to form the electric current. For example, in the electrolytic processing of bauxite ore to produce
aluminium metal, the bauxite is dissolved in cryolite- another aluminium compound - and this
solution then has free aluminium ions (charge carriers) that can move through the liquid as an electric
current. These ions are positively charged, and will move because of the electric force towards the
negative cathode. This is still an electric circuit that must obey the rule of conservation of charge,
and in which we can measure the current as the rate of flow of charge.
As the charge on an electron is a fixed negative amount, we can easily calculate the charge on any
ion. This would be important in a situation where ions were moving as the charge carriers in an
electric current, for example, in electrolysis.
Learning tip
The charge on a proton is the same magnitude as that on an electron, but is positive: 9. = +1.6 x 10-19C.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What would be the charge on an iron (III) ion, Fe3+?
Three electrons have been lost, so the net charge is that of the ion's three excess protons:
9Fe3+ = 3 x 1.6 x 10-19 = + 4.8 x 10-19
Questions
| (a) If 12.5 x 1018 electrons move through a lamp in 3.2 seconds, what current is flowing through
the lamp?
(b) How many coulombs of charge move through an ammeter in 8 seconds if it is reading 0.95 A?
(c) How long would it take for a current of 0.68 A to move 100 billion electrons past a certain point?
In a shuttling ball experiment to demonstrate the movement of electrons as an electric current, the
galvanometer showed a current of 0.12 PA.
(a) If the ball carried 20 nC of charge on each swing, how long does one swing take?
(b) How many electrons does the ball carry in each swing?
3
In an electrolysis experiment, 0.01 moles of Cu2+ ions moves through the copper sulfate solution in
23 minutes. How much current flows?
(One mole contains Avogadro's number of any particle, and this is NA = 6.02 * 102.)
Key definitions
Charge is a fundamental property of some particles. It is the cause of the electromagnetic force,
and it is a basic aspect of describing electrical effects.
Charge is measured in coulombs, C. One coulomb is the quantity of charge that passes a point in a
conductor per second when one ampere of current is flowing in the conductor. The amount of charge on
a single electron in these units is -1.6 x 10-19 C.
Electric current is the rate of flow of charge. Current can be calculated from the equation:
charge passing a point (C)
Current (A) = -
time for that charge to pass (s)
- 4Q
At
One ampere (1 A) is the movement of one coulomb (1C) of charge per second (1 s)
68
3.1
produce a straight-line graph of experimental results and calculate
our answer from the gradient. In this case, plotting resistance on the
y-axis against length on the x-axis will give the gradient as and
from this we could calculate the resistivity with more confidence in
our conclusion.
As we have Ron the y-axis and / on the x-axis, comparing the
equation above with y = mx + c shows that the gradient is
equivalent to so we can find the resistivity by multiplying the
gradient by the cross-sectional area.
: p=
: p=0.730 x A = 0.730 x 3.8 * 10-8 = 2.8 x 10-60 m
Experimentally, we have found that the resistivity of aluminium is
2.8 x 10-80 m.
Questions
1
Calculate the resistance of a piece of constantan wire if it is 80 cm
long and has a diameter of 0.84 mm.
2
Explain three ways of reducing uncertainties in an experimental
investigation to find the resistivity of a metal wire.
Conductivity is the opposite concept to resistivity. It is calculated
as the reciprocal of the resistivity and is measured in Siemens per
metre (Sm-"). Calculate and compare the conductivity values for
polyethene and copper.
fig C Accurate measurement of the wire's diameter is vital.
4
In a resistance experiment, a gold ring was connected into a
circuit as a resistor. The connections touched on diametrically
opposite points on the circular ring. Its diameter is 2 cm, and the
metal's cross-section is a rectangle 3 mm by 0.5 mm. A voltmeter
connected across the ring measured 4.2 mV, whilst the current
through it was measured at 18 A.
Resistivity investigation example
An investigation like the one explained above produced the results
shown in fig D. This was for an aluminium wire with a measured
diameter averaging 0.22 mm (giving A = 3.8 x 10-8 m2). A single
1.5 V cell was used to drive a current, which was measured at
each different length. These data were then used to calculate the
resistances plotted on the graph for each length. From the graph,
we can use its gradient to find the resistivity of aluminium.
0.800
gold ring
0.7007
Resistance/
0.600
0.500+
0.400-
20.300
0.200
0.100-
0.000
08001
fig E
(a) Calculate the resistivity of gold.
(b) Describe a practical difficulty with undertaking an experiment
of this kind.
0.900
1.000
5 Estimate the volume of metal in the wire in a fuse.
Length/m
fig D From the gradient of this graph, it is possible to calculate the resistivity of
the aluminium wire in the investigation.
Ay_AR_0.730 -0.000 - 0.730
gradient
Ax Al 1.000 -0.000
0.100
0.2001
0.300N
0.400
0.500
0600
0,7009
$
Key definition
The resistivity of a material is defined as the same value as the
resistance between opposite faces of a cubic metre of the material.
76
3.1
2
WORKED EXAMPLE
A cell transfers 40) of chemical potential energy for every 15 C of
electrons that pass through it, in order to power an electrical
circuit. What is the cell's emf?
8 = 15
Electrical models
A model is a way of thinking about an idea or
phenomenon in order to help us understand it better.
For example, as it is too small to see, it is common for people
to imagine the structure of an atom as being similar to planets
orbiting the Sun in the Solar System. There are many aspects
of this model that do not correctly represent an atom, but there
are some aspects that enable people to think about how atoms
interact with a little less confusion than if they did not use this
imagination model.
Electricity has many aspects that are not visible to us in everyday
life, and physicists often use models to explain some of these.
All models will have limitations, so it is important to be able to
evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of any model, in order to
ensure that you do not rely too heavily on it.
ε = 2.7V
For every 2000 C of charge passing through it, a loudspeaker
transfers 18 500) of electrical energy into sound and heat.
What is the loudspeaker's pd?
V-W
V-18500
2000
V = 9.25 V
The electronvolt
The electronvolt, eV, is a unit of energy that is generally used
with sub-atomic particles. Its definition comes from the equation
defining voltage:
Modelling voltage
One model that could be used to try and understand the transfers
of energy in an electric circuit could be to think of an electric
circuit as a ski area.
maximum
sarning
losing
If an electron is accelerated by a potential difference of 1 V, the
energy it will gain is:
E = Ve
1. E = 1 x 1.6x 10-19 = 1.6 x 10-19)
The amount of energy an electron gains by passing through a
voltage of 1 V is an electronvolt. So 1 eV = 1.6 x 10-19 J.
Spe
gaining
Spe
losing
spe
losing
gpe
5.00
VOLT
losing
gpe
lost gpe back to
same level as start
BATTERY
figC Modelling an electric circuit as a ski area.
The skiers on the lift gain gravitational potential energy, which
is representing electrical energy in this analogy. By the time
they have skied back down through all the runs and over all the
obstacles, they have lost all that gpe again and are back to the
same level as before they started. This illustrates the principle of
conservation of energy in an electric circuit. If moving charge is
given energy by a source of emf, it will return all that energy on
its journey around the circuit, through the various pds. Around the
circuit, the total of all the emfs will be the same as the total of all
the pds - total energy supplied will equal total energy used,
5.00
VOLT
fig B We can measure voltage across a component with a voltmeter
connected in parallel.
70
3.1
2
Electrical energy transfer
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define electromotive force and potential difference
• make calculations of voltage and the energy transfer in components
evaluate a model of electrical circuits
For any electrical circuit to be of use, it acts as a means to transfer energy usefully. The circuit must
have at least one component that can supply electrical energy. It will also have components that
convert this electrical energy into other forms, and at least one of these forms of energy will be
useful to its purpose.
For example, in a bicycle light there will be a cell that provides electrical energy from a chemical
reaction, and there will be a lamp that converts some of the electrical energy into light energy.
Learning tip
Almost every aspect of the
study of physics relates to the
transfer of energy. Energy is
the means by which things
happen.
Voltages
The electrical quantity voltage is a measure of the amount of energy a component transfers per unit
of charge passing through it. It can be calculated from the equation:
energy transferred (1)
voltage (V) =
charge passing (0)
VED
Electromotive force
For a supply voltage - a component which is putting electrical energy into a circuit – the correct
term for the voltage is electromotive force, or emf. If a cell supplies one joule (1J) of energy per
coulomb of charge (1 C) that passes through it, it has an emf of 1 volt (1 V).
emf (V) =
energy transferred (J)
charge passing (C)
WP
fig A Electric circuits transfer energy.
For example, if the bicycle lamp in fig A was powered by a cell with an emf of 1.5 V, then this cell
would transfer 1.5 J of electrical energy to each coulomb of charge that passed through it.
Potential difference
For a component which is using electrical energy in a circuit and transferring this energy into other
forms, the correct term for the voltage is potential difference, or pd. If a component uses one joule
(1J) of energy per coulomb of charge (1 C) that passes through it, it has a pd of 1 volt (1 V). The
energy being used by the component could be referred to as work done, W.
energy transferred (1)
pd (V) =
charge passing (C)
V=W
For example, if the bicycle light in fig A produced light from an LED with a pd of 1.5 V, then this
LED would transfer 1.5 J of electrical energy from each coulomb of charge that passed through it
into light energy and a little thermal energy.
3.1
4
Resistivity
Material
Resistivity p/
m at 20°C
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define resistivity
explain how to measure resistivity experimentally
make calculations of resistance using resistivity
Resistance is the result of collisions between charge carriers and
atoms in the current's path. This effect will vary depending on
the density of charge carriers and the density of fixed atoms, as
well as the strength of the forces between them. Thus, pieces of
different materials with identical dimensions will have differing
resistances. The general property of a material to resist the flow
of electric current is called resistivity, which has the symbol
rho, p, and SI units ohm metres, 2 m.
Silver
1.6 x 10-8
+0.38
Copper
1.7 x 10-8
+0.40
Aluminium
2.8 x 10-8
+0.38
Constantan
4.9 x 10-7
+0.003
Germanium
4.2 x 10-1
-5.0
Silicon
2.6 x 10
-7.0
Polyethene
2 x 1011
Glass
Epoxy resin
table A Resistivity varies greatly between materials, and is also dependent on
temperature. Note the small change in resistivity with temperature
for constantan, an alloy of copper and nickel; this information is used
where accurately known resistance is important.
-1012
-1015
Learning tip
Resistivity is a property of a material. All samples of the same
material, regardless of their shape and size, will have the same
resistivity, whilst their resistances may be very different.
Investigation
Investigating resistivity
You can investigate the resistivity for a metal in the school laboratory
using a simple circuit.
The resistance of an object is dependent on its dimensions and
the material from which it is made. This gives rise to an equation
for calculating the resistance of a uniform sample of material if
we know the resistivity of the material:
resistivity (22 m) sample length (m)
resistance (Q) =
cross-sectional area (m2)
A
fig A With knowledge of the resistivity, p. of a material, we can calculate the
resistance of objects made from it.
Resistivity equation example
See fig A and table A. What is the resistance of a piece of
copper fuse wire if it is 0.40 mm in diameter and 2 cm long?
wire radius = 0.20 mm = 2.0 x 10-4m
cross-sectional area, A = Tr2 = 7 * (2.0 x 10-4)2 = 1.3 x 10-7m²
fig B Measuring the resistance for various lengths of a wire will allow us to
plot a graph to find its resistivity.
We will need to use a micrometer screw gauge to measure the wire's
diameter. For improved accuracy, this is done in right-angled pairs at
several places along the length of the wire, and then we take the
mean diameter measurement.
For several different lengths of the wire, the wire's resistance should
be measured using the voltmeter-ammeter method (R =). The
resistance will be small, so care must be taken to ensure currents are
safely low.
R-1.7 x 10-8 x 0.02
1.3 x 10-7
R = 2.6 x 10-30
A
The equation involving resistivity means that we could calculate a
value for it by re-arranging the equation and taking one of the results
and making the calculation. However, it is always more reliable to
3.1
Exam-style questions
1 Which of the following is a unit equivalent to the volt?
(a) Ah
(b) Cs-1
(c) JC-1
(d) Js-1
[1]
[Total: 1]
4
6 An integrated circuit uses strips of gold as connectors and
strips of silicon as resistors.
A strip of gold of cross-sectional area 3.0 x 10-6m2 carries a
current of 8.0 A. The charge carrier density n is
6.0 x 1028 m3
(a) Show that the carrier drift velocity v for gold is
approximately 3 x 10-7ms-1
(b) An approximate value of v for a sample of silicon of the
same dimensions, carrying the same current would be
0.2 ms1
Compare this value with the one for gold and account for
the difference in the values.
[2]
(c) State and explain what happens to the resistance of a
sample of silicon as its temperature increases. [2]
[Total: 6]
2 An ammeter reads 1.42 A. How many electrons pass through
the ammeter in one hour?
(a) 5.1 x 103
(b) 8.9 x 1018
(c) 5.3 x 1020
(d) 3.2 x 1022
[1]
[Total: 1]
7 (a) Explain the difference between resistance and resistivity. [2]
(b) The resistivity of copper is 1.7 x 10-62 m. A copper wire is
0.50 m long and has a cross sectional area of 1.0 x 10-6m2.
Calculate its resistance.
[2]
[Total: 4]
3 Which of the following is a correct explanation for the shape
of a current/voltage graph for a filament bulb?
(a) Below a certain temperature, the resistivity of the filament
material suddenly reduces to zero.
(b) Above a certain temperature, the resistivity of the filament
material suddenly reduces to zero.
(c) Increased voltage increases the current, which raises the
temperature, increasing the resistance.
(d) As the voltage increases, the current increases, increasing
the temperature of the filament, causing a release of more
conduction electrons.
[1]
[Total: 1]
4 Explain, in terms of energy, the difference between potential
difference (pd) and electromotive force (emf).
[Total: 2]
8 When tidying a prep room, a teacher discovers a tray of
resistance wires that have lost their labels. She decides to
ask her students to carry out experiments to determine the
material that each wire is made of by measuring the resistivity
of the wires.
(a) Explain why the teacher asks the students to measure the
resistivity and not the resistance of the wires.
[2]
(b) You are to describe a method to determine accurately the
resistivity of one of the metal wires.
Your description should include:
• the circuit diagram you would use
• the quantities you would measure
• the graph you would plot
• how you would determine the resistivity.
[9]
[Total: 11]
[2]
5 The planet Jupiter has a moon lo. Volcanic activity on lo
releases clouds of electrons which travel at high speeds
towards Jupiter. During a 15 s time period, 2.6 x 1026 electrons
reach Jupiter from lo.
Calculate the current.
[Total: 3]
[3]
86
Thinking Bigger
3.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the booklets.
1. The extract opposite consists of various snippets from the manufacturer's sales brochure,
and also from the user manual. Consider the snippets and comment on the type of
writing that is used in each case. Try and answer the following questions:
a. Identify which parts of the extract above are from the sales brochure, and which are e
from the operations manual. Justify your choices.
b. Discuss the science presented in each booklet, in relation to the intended audience.
105530808800870
Think about what you
would expect to be the
different purposes of
the two booklets.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in
this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the
answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work in context with what
you have already learned in your course.
08538388867070
impedance is a term used
to mean 'resistance' when
charge flow is in changing
directions.
2. a. Using information from the discharge current waveform graph and table, calculate
the average current for each of the two parts of the discharge, and use this average
current to calculate the charge transferred in the times given. Do these calculations for
the 50, 100 and 150 entries in the table, and compare the variations in charge.
b. For the same 50, 100 N and 150 N entries in the table, use your charge values to
calculate the voltage needed to cause each shock to deliver exactly 200).
C. Compare your answers to part (b) with the voltage values that Ohm's law gives you
for the peak current in each case.
3. One of the Environmental specifications claims that the unit can survive a one metre
drop onto its corner. Calculate the force that the unit would experience if it falls one
metre and is stopped by the ground in 20 ms.
555558067778770
Activity
The manufacturers of the LIFEPAK 1000 would like an additional brochure that its customers can leave in
hospital waiting rooms for patients to read. Use the information above to design such a leaflet.
Consider the likely level
of scientific education
of the intended
audience for this
publication; as well as
the concerns that they
might have about being
in hospital.
From the brochures LP1000_Operations Manual_3205213-002 and LP1000_Brochure_3303851_A_LR
by Physio Control, www.physio-control.com
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
85
Electrical quantities
3.1
fig D Superconductors can levitate magnets, as they do not accept penetration by magnetic fields. This is the Meissner
Effect.
Questions
Explain why a piece of silicon semiconductor will have a lower resistance at a higher temperature.
2
'The critical temperature for superconductivity for lead is 7.2 K'. Explain what this statement means.
3 Some types of glass have been manufactured that do conduct electricity. Suggest and explain what
properties impurities might have in these glasses to make them less insulating than standard glass.
Kev definitions
Semiconductors have a lower resistivity than insulators, but higher than conductors. They usually
only have small numbers of delocalised electrons that are free to conduct.
The valence band is a range of energy amounts that electrons in a solid material can have which keeps
them close to one particular atom.
The conduction band is a range of energy amounts that electrons in a solid material can have which
delocalises them to move more freely through the solid.
The critical temperature for a material is that below which its resistivity instantly drops to zero.
Electrical quantities
3.1
The ski lift takes skiers to the top of the slope - it gives them potential energy like a battery gives
electrons electrical energy. From there, they can slide down a number of possible routes - like
separate, parallel, loops in a circuit. If the skier does a trick off an obstacle, then we could imagine
that he was passing through a component and giving up energy to the component. We could think
about measuring the emf of the chairlift, and the pd of each obstacle on the run.
Notice that although the picture in fig D has skiers and snowboarders, for simplicity we only refer
to 'skiers. This is a weakness of the model, as both would represent charge carriers flowing in our
circuit, but usually electric circuits have only one type of charge carrier that flows - the electrons.
Questions
Explain how potential difference is different from electromotive force.
2 (a) A cell provides 76 C of charge with 120) of energy. What is the cell's emf?
(b) When a lamp carries a current of 2.4 A for 5.4 s, it transfers 120) of energy. What is the pd across the lamp?
3 Convert the following:
(a) 9.6 x 10-19) into electronvolts
(b) 4.8 MeV into joules.
fig D Modelling charge carriers
as skiers.
4 Write an evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of the ski area model of an electric circuit. Include
discussion of at least the following ideas:
• the representation of charge carriers
. a complete circuit is needed
gravitational potential as the analogy for electrical energy
the ski lift as a cell
• the snowpark obstacles as components using electrical energy
• differing speeds by different skiers.
5 Write a suggestion for a different model of an electric circuit, explaining what electrical aspect is
represented by the various sections of your model.
Key definitions
The electrical quantity voltage is a measure of the amount of energy a component transfers per unit of
charge passing through it. It can be calculated by the equation:
energy transferred (1)
voltage (V) =
charge passing (C)
V-
Electromotive force, or emf, is a supply voltage.
For a component that is using electrical energy in a circuit and transferring this energy into other forms,
the correct term for the voltage is potential difference, or pd.
The electronvolt is the amount of energy an electron gains by passing through a voltage of 1 V.
1 eV = 1.6 10-19)
1 mega electronvolt = 1 MeV = 1.6 x 10-13)
3.1
Current and voltage relationships
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
state Ohm's law
calculate resistances
explain the I-V characteristics of components
The movement of electrons through a circuit is caused by the
electric force that an emf generates. Thus, an emf could be said
to drive the current around a circuit. A higher voltage emf would
be expected to do this to a greater extent, as it creates a stronger
force on the charges so they are driven round the circuit faster and
in greater quantity-resulting in an increased current. The electric
force is directly proportional to the voltage, so we would expect
current to increase in direct proportion to voltage. In many cases
this is true - 10 V - but in some situations other factors become
important and alter the relationship.
Investigation
Investigating 1-V relationships
We can do an experiment to investigate whether or not a
component follows Ohm's law using the equipment in fig A.
The component under test is the resistor, and we could replace this
resistor to allow testing of other components.
Use various values of supply emf and measure the potential
difference across and current through the resistor for each one.
This should include reversing the terminals on the power supply in
order to measure the effects of negative pds across the resistor.
In the case of a resistor, negative pds correspond to negative
currents - a voltage creating an electric force in the opposite
direction in the wires will attract electrons in the opposite direction
around the circuit.
In this example, the results would produce a graph like the one
shown in fig B. The straight line illustrates that is proportional to V
for all tested values, telling us that the resistor is an ohmic conductor.
Current/A
Resistance calculations
Electrical resistance is considered to be the opposition to the
flow of current within a conductor At a given moment it can be
calculated from the equation:
potential difference (V)
resistance (2) =
current (1)
Potential difference/V
Ohm's law
SH
fig B 1-V graph for a resistor.
fig A Measuring the resistance of an ohmic conductor.
You can calculate the resistance of the resistor from the graph in
fig B. First calculate the gradient of the straight line from:
m= 41
AV
A component through which the current is proportional to the
voltage driving it is referred to as an ohmic conductor, as this
means it follows Ohm's law. The proportional relationship can be
used to find the resistance of the component.
For example, what is the resistance of the resistor shown in fig A?
This calculation is the reciprocal of the one for resistance given
above. Thus, you can find the resistance here by taking the reciprocal
of the gradient:
REV. 4.0
R=ī0.18
R:1
R = 220
For an ohmic conductor, the answer to the calculation of
resistance would be the same for all voltages and their
corresponding current values (providing the temperature remains
constant - see Section 3.1.5).
72
Note that using the gradient is only effective for an ohmic
conductor. If the line is not straight, the resistance changes and
can be calculated using Ohm's law at each specific V/I value on
the line.
BIGGER
SHOCKING STUFF Cm
A defibrillator is a medical device which is designed to deliver an electric shock to a patient's heart,
to restart it if the heart has stopped, or reset if it is beating with a dangerously unpredictable rhythm.
In this activity, we will consider how the electrical and other characteristics of one make of
defibrillator help it to perform its function,
Snippet 2:
Snippet 1:
Patient
Impedance (2)
11(A)
12 (A)
13 (A)
14 (A)
T1 (ms) T2 (ms)
25
50.3
28.2
3.9
5.0
50
28.2
14.6
14.5
9.3
7.5
5.0
fig A The LIFEPAK
1000 can help
paramedics with
resuscitation by
restarting the
patient's heart
using an electric
shock through the
75
5.8
1141
100
125
Note: Table values are nominal 150
for a 200-joule shock
175
155
12.9
11.1
9.8
20.1
14.6
11.7
10.0
8.7
7.8
7.1
19.7
14.5
11.7
9.9
8.7
7.7
7.1
10.7
9.3
8.2
7.3
6.6
l 6.2
5.7
5.9
7.5
8.7
9.7
10.4
11.1
11.7
6.5
7.0
| 7.4
heart.
fig B Graph of the current against time during discharge. The defibrillator discharge has a large
shock in one direction (TI) followed by a smaller shock in the reverse direction (T2) each of
which follows a trapezium shape on the graph. The table shows the current values and
times during the discharge, for various different resistance values of the patient.
Snippet 3:
cprMAX Technology
The 1000 features our exclusive cprMAX technology, which gives you
the flexibility to choose CPR settings that best accommodate your
patient and CPR protocol requirements. The pre-shock CPR option
allows adjustment of the CPR interval prior to the first shock, making
the 1000 the only device that minimizes pre-shock pauses by allowing
providers to continue compressions while the AED charges.
Recently published clinical data shows a relationship between
increased compression fraction and survival to hospital discharge,
and the 2010 AHA Guidelines place a strong emphasis on
high-quality CPR. With the LIFEPAK 1000, you have more control
over the CPR you provide in lifesaving settings than ever before.
LIFEPAK TOUGH™
Built for the harshest environments, the LIFEPAK 1000 is the toughest.
most durable AED from Physio-Control. The device itself withstands
rigorous drop-testing from any angle, and is enclosed in a highly
protective case with bumpers. In addition, the 1000 has received an
IP55 rating - the highest for any AED - signifying maximum protection
from external elements-
360 Joules
Like every LIFEPAK defibrillator from Physio-Control, the 1000 can
escalate energy up to 360). Studies show that for difficult-to-
defibrillate patients, repeating 2003 shocks yields significantly lower VF
termination rates. And the 2010 AHA Guidelines note that rescuers
may consider using escalating energy up to 360 J if initial shocks at a
lower dose aren't working.
Snippet 4:
ENVIRONMENTAL
One Hour Operating Temperature (from room temperature to
temperature extreme, one hour duration): -20 to 60°C (-4 to +140°F).
Operating Temperature: 0° to 50°C (32 to 122°F).
Storage Temperature: -30° to 60°C (-22° to 144°F) with battery and
electrodes (maximum exposure limited to 7 days).
Atmospheric Pressure: 575 hPa to 1060 hPa (4572 to -382 meters:
15,000 to -1253 feet).
Relative Humidity: 5 to 95% (non-condensing).
Dust/Water Resistance: IP55 with battery and REDI-PAK
electrodes installed (IEC 60529/EN 60529).
Bump: 15g, 1000 bumps (IEC 600-68-2-29).
Shock: 40 g peak, 15-23 ms. 45 Hz cross over frequency
Drop: 1 meter drop on each corner, edge and surface
(MIL-STD-810F, 516.5, Procedure IV).
Snippet 6:
Picture the waiting room of a hospital or a corridor or a
cafeteria. Now picture a visitor, patient or staff member struck
down by sudden cardiac emergency. Who will respond first? It
could be an ALS-trained member of the code team, but it's just
as likely to be a nurse or a receptionist trained in the use of the
1000. The LIFEPAK 1000 defibrillator is ready for all these
possibilities, combining the simplicity of one-push defibrillation
with clear guidance, both onscreen and from audio prompts.
Snippet 5:
physical characteristics
Height: 8.7 cm (3.4 in).
Width: 23.4 cm (9.2 in).
Depth: 27.7 cm (10.9 in).
Weight: 32 kg (7.1 lbs) with one
set of REDI-PAK electrodes and
one nonrechargeable battery
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
YOU ARE
HERE
3.2
_3.
16
Insulators
Electrical insulators can be thought of as materials in which the energy gap between the valence
band and the conduction band is so large that there are virtually zero electrons available for
conduction. There will therefore be no conduction holes either. A very large input of energy is
required in order to make the material conduct. Often this results in melting, or other damage, before
the material becomes electrically conducting. For example, glass is normally an excellent electrical
insulator, but a very high electric field, more than 10 million volts per metre, created across glass can
cause it to become conducting.
Superconductivity
Resistance increases with higher temperatures, because the higher level of internal energy in the
material causes more vibration of the fixed ions and these collide more often with charge carriers to
reduce their speed of movement through the material. Reducing the temperature therefore reduces
resistance, allowing greater current flow.
HI ENERGY
plus
fig C If we cool a conductor, the current through it is seen to increase because its resistance drops.
Cooling to ever lower temperatures continues this trend, until something quite unexpected happens.
Below a certain critical temperature, the resistance suddenly drops to zero. This is called
superconductivity. The critical temperature varies with material, but for most metals it will be below
-243 °C. Complex ceramic superconductors have been created that have temperatures at which they
conduct without any resistance as high as –135°C.
Superconductors are especially useful in applications where a large current is needed, as a large
current would normally waste too much energy or damage the surroundings with the heat dissipated.
For example, the strong magnets needed in a particle accelerator will often be superconducting
electromagnets, cooled to very low temperatures to maintain their superconductivity. The
electromagnets in the Large Hadron Collider operate at about 1.9 K.
Did you know?
WP
Low temperatures are often expressed on the Kelvin temperature scale, where 0 Kelvin (K) is referred
to as Absolute Zero.
OK = -273.15°C
0°C = 273.15K
We usually ignore the 0.15® and convert from Celsius to Kelvin by adding 273º. Absolute Zero is the
lowest temperature possible, as this represents a temperature where the particles have zero internal
energy.
Exam-style questions
3.1
10
9 (a) State Ohm's law.
[2]
(b) Using the axes below sketch graphs to show how resistance
varies with potential difference for a fixed resistor and a
1.5 V filament lamp.
The graph shows the current-potential difference
characteristic for an electrical component.
Current/A
Resistance
Resistance
1.5
1.5
Potential difference/V
Potential difference/V
FIXED RESISTOR
FILAMENT LAMP
(c) The filament of a lamp is made of metal. Explain why the
lamp does not demonstrate Ohm's law.
[Total: 7]
Potential difference/V
[2]
(a) State the name of the component.
(b) State the resistance of the component when the potential
difference is -0.7 V.
[1]
(c) Calculate the resistance of the component when the
potential difference is +0.7 V.
(d) State a practical use for this component.
[Total: 5]
Electrical quantities
3.1
Conduction 'holes'
When an electron enters the conduction band and moves away, this leaves the atom with an
effective positive charge. The empty space the electron has left is referred to as a (positive) hole.
If an electron from another atom moves to fill the hole, leaving its original atom with a hole, the
hole has effectively moved. As the electrons will be attracted to jump in the positive direction of an
applied voltage, the hole will slowly appear to move in the opposite direction. A positive hole moving
towards the negative cathode is effectively another charge carrier, contributing to the current flow in
a semiconductor. It is analogous to the current flow in electrolysis, where positively and negatively
charged particles are moving in opposite directions at the same time.
Learning tin
Note that conduction by holes does not mean there is overall movement of the positive lattice ions.
The holes are an absence of an electron, and it is this space that seemingly moves as electrons actually
jump in the opposite direction.
I-V characteristics of a semiconductor diode
A diode is made by joining together different types of semiconductors, which normally creates an
energy barrier at the junction between them, blocking the movement of charge carriers (holes and
electrons) across the barrier. This barrier can be overcome in the forward direction if a small forward
voltage is applied. In the reverse direction, only very few charge carriers can pass through at low
voltages. They account for a tiny 'leakage current'. Once the reverse voltage becomes large enough,
it can overcome the large reverse energy barrier and force the conduction process in the opposite
direction.
+]
Forward
conduction
Reverse
breakdown
voltage
+ V
Leakage
Current
Forward
junction
potential
Reverse
breakdown
-Il
fig B The I-V characteristics for a semiconductor diode in detail.
Light dependent resistors (LDRs) and thermistors
Light dependent resistors have the property that their resistance depends on the light level
around them. In brighter conditions, the LDR will have a lower resistance. LDRs are made from
semiconductor material, and light landing on the material can boost electrons from the valence
energy band up to the conduction band, increasing the number of conduction electrons. The effect
of this is to make the LDR conduct better - it has a lower resistance.
Thermistors work in exactly the same way, except that their resistance depends on thermal
energy from the surroundings. The most common type of thermistors are referred to as negative
temperature coefficient thermistors. These use thermal energy to boost their electrons into the
conduction energy band, meaning their resistance falls as the temperature rises.
