7.1
3
Radial electric fields
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. define radial electric fields
• draw and interpret diagrams of electric fields
describe the relationship between electric field strength and
electric potential
use the equations relating to field strength and potential for
radial electric fields
Radial electric field strength
We have seen that a radial field has its field lines spreading further
apart simply due to geometry. This means that the equation
for the field strength of a radial electric field must incorporate
this weakening of the field with distance from the charge. The
expression for radial field strength at a distance r from a charge Q is:
EF ATTEN
Radial fields
Strictly speaking, this is only correct for a field that is produced
in a vacuum, as the value €o- the permittivity of free space - is a
constant which relates to the ability of the fabric of the universe
to support electric fields. Its value is Ep = 8.85 x 10-12 Fm-!
Other substances, for example water, may be better or worse
at supporting electric fields, so an extra factor (the relative
permittivity, e) would appear in the equation to account for this.
Air is considered to be near enough a vacuum that we use the
equation given above for electric fields in air.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the electric field strength at a distance of 1 angstrom
(1 x 10-10 m) from a proton?
E460P2
(1.610-19
4* 3.14 x 8.85 x 10-12 x (1 x 10-10)
E = 1.44 x 1011 Vm1
Potential in a radial electric field
Electric field strength tells us how quickly the electric potential
is changing. A stronger field will have the equipotentials closer
together. This equation states that the electric field strength, E, is
equal to the rate of change of potential, V, with distance, x.
dx
This leads to the expression for radial field potential at a distancer
from a charge Q:
1-
Q
V= ATTENT
fig A The radial electric field around a proton (or any positively charged
sphere)
In the region around a positively charged sphere, or point
charge such as a proton, the electric field will act outwards in
all directions away from the centre of the sphere, as shown in
fig A. You will see that the arrows in fig A get further apart as
you move further away from the sphere, indicating that the field
strength reduces as you move away from the centre. This means
that the distance between equipotentials also increases as you
move further away. The field is the means by which the potential
changes, so if it is weaker, the potential changes less quickly
Within a charged sphere, there is no electric field, as a charged
particle would feel no resultant force on it. The overall effect of
all the charges on the sphere cancel out within the sphere itself.
Distance measurements for use in calculations should always be
considered from the centre of a charged sphere.
You will see from the equation above that the position of zero
potential can be considered to be at infinity.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the electric potential at a distance of 1 angstrom
(1 x 10-10 m) from a proton?
V 410
(1.6 x 10-19)
4x 3.14 8.85 x 10-12 x (1 x 10-19)
V = 14.4V
7.1
3
Questions
Learning tip
The constant expression is sometimes written as the single letter,
k (Coulomb's constant). The value for kis:
k= 1 = 8.99 * 10°N m² C-2
This means our expressions for radial field strength and potential can
be written:
kQ
KATED
A Van de Graaff generator is charged with 2.5 x 10-7 coulombs in a
school lab demonstration. The spherical metal dome has a diameter
of 30 cm.
(a) Draw the electric field around the charged dome of the
generator.
(b) Add at least three equipotential lines to your diagram. Label
these with their potential values, following the correct scale of
your diagram.
(c) What is the electric field strength at a distance of 5 cm from the
surface of the charged dome?
(d) What is the electric potential at a distance of 35 cm from the
surface of the charged dome?
Vako
2
Explain what would happen to an electron which found itself at the
exact centre of the electric field shown in fig B(b).
3
Draw a pair of electrons 8 cm apart. On your diagram, add field
lines to show the shape of the electric field produced by these two
electrons. Also add in several equipotential lines.
4 Why is the electric field in fig B(d) strongest near the point of the
spike?
Combining electric fields
In a region where there are electric fields caused by more than
one charged object, the overall field is the vector sum at each
point of all the contributions from each field. If you imagine
building the overall field up from the force effects of each
contributing field, you can see that at every point you have to
work out the resultant force, and in this way you know how a
charged particle would be affected there. The sum of all of these
individual force effects is the overall electric field.
Charge is particularly concentrated in regions around spikes or
points on charged objects. This means that they have close field
lines and the field will be strong around them. For this reason,
lightning conductors are spiked: the concentrated charge will
more strongly attract opposite charges, so lightning is more likely
to hit the lightning conductor than the building being protected. In
fact, the field around a spiked lightning conductor is often strong
enough that it can cause charge leakage through the conductor
before charge builds up to a point to produce a lightning strike.
The probability of lightning occurring is reduced, further
protecting the building from these dangers.
5
If fig B(a) shows a hydrogen atom, then the separation of the
charges would be 5.3 x 10-11 m.
(a) What is the strength of the electric field caused by the proton,
at the point where the electron is?
(b) Calculate the force on the electron caused by the proton's
electric field at this distance.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
18*** BV
+
fig B Complex fields still have their equipotentials perpendicular to the field lines at all points.
40
TOPIC 7
Electric and magnetic fields
CHAPTER
7.1
Electric fields
Introduction
The usual explanation for the spiky hair caused by touching a Van de Graaff generator is that the excess charges it puts
WP on the body all repel each other, so each hair feels a force pushing it away from the others and from the head. Whilst
this is true, it is a bit of an over-simplification. The hair shows us the existence of an electric field emanating from the
person's head, with the hair trying to follow the electric field lines. Gravity also affects the hair, so there is a resultant force
effect. If your school has a Van de Graaff generator, you could try setting up an experiment where the person in contact with it
is in different positions (i.e. lying down on a wooden bench, bending over at the waist etc.), so that the electrical and
gravitational forces are not working against each other quite so much!
In this chapter, we will see the difference between uniform and radial fields, and learn how to calculate the strength of both
types of electric field. We will also explore the concept of electric potential, which relates to the storage and delivery of
electrical energy.
All the maths you need
• Recognising and use of appropriate units in calculations (e.g. comparing NC- and Vm-1)
• Use of trigonometric functions (e.g. in verifying Coulomb's law from angled strings)
• Identifying uncertainties in measurements (e.g. the error in the conclusions from Millikan's oil drop experiment)
• Solving quadratic equations (e.g. in calculations of radial electric field strength)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. finding the separation of two charges from Coulomb's law)
• Plotting two variables from experimental data (e.g. from a Coulomb's law experiment)
Exam-style questions
1 A correct unit for electric field strength is:
A Cm-1
B kV m-1
CNC
D Vm
5 Two identical table tennis balls, M and N, are attached to
non-conducting threads and suspended from a point P. The
balls are each given the same positive charge and they hang as
shown in the diagram. The mass of each ball is 2.7 g.
[1]
[Total: 1]
18.0 cm/135359
20.6cm-
2 The electric field strength from a negative point charge:
A decreases in magnitude with the square of the charge
B decreases in magnitude with the square of the distance
from the charge
C increases in magnitude with distance from the charge
D increases in magnitude with the square of the distance from
the charge.
[1]
[Total: 1]
3 The force between two protons held 1 nm apart is:
A 2.6 x 10-20 N
B 2.3 X 10-19 N
C 2.3 x 10-10N
D 1.44 x 10°N
(a) Draw a free-body force diagram for ball M, label your
diagram with the names of the forces.
[2]
(b) (i) Show that the tension in one of the threads is about
3 x 10-2 N.
(ii) Show that the electrostatic force between the balls is
about 2 x 10-2 N.
(iii) Calculate the charge on each ball.
(c) Explain what would have happened if the charge given
to ball M was greater than the charge given to ball N. [2]
[Total: 12]
[1]
[Total: 1]
4 (a) Explain what is meant by a uniform electric field. [2]
(b) Describe how a uniform electric field can be demonstrated
in a laboratory
[3]
[Total: 5]
46
Thinking Bigger
7.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this report.
Curvy
Think about who the
intended audience is for
this information.
1. a. Explain why the author has explained electric fields from first principles in this report. E
b. Why has he still used a significant amount of technical terminology and high level
vocabulary?
2. The photograph shown here was not in the original report, but has been added for this
textbook. Explain why there might be no pictures in the report produced by Mr Bracken.
3. What is the importance in this report of including references to the effects of electric
fields on living things?
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
4. a. What is the time period for a cycle of the alternating current in the USA?
b. Why would the author have chosen to express field values in units of Vm- rather
than the other correct possibility of NC-T?
5. a. We have learned that the electric field around point charges is radial. Why could the
field emanating from a long straight cable also be referred to as radial?
b. Draw a diagram to show a high voltage power cable, 10 m above a human standing
on the ground. Add electric field and equipotential lines to your diagram to show how it
emerges from the cable, and connects to the ground. Assume a fixed instant in time,
when the voltage in the cable is exactly 500 kV.
6. a. What does this extract tell us about the comparative resistivities of bone and blood? E
b. Explain why you think this difference exists.
The proposed 500kV
cable would be at a
minimum height of Im.
and a standard point
where consideration is
made is at a height of
Im off the ground.
Consider the differences
in the substances making
up blood and bone.
Activity
The author has written that'close to transmission-or distribution-line conductors, the field decreases
rapidly with distance from the conductors.' Imagine a written question from the Washington State
government in which senators ask for explanation of this claim. Write a letter in response which explains
the mathematics involved in radial electric fields. Include some example calculations to illustrate the values
involved, for comparison with other values already given in the report
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
45
Exam-style questions
7.1
6 Liquid crystal displays (LCDs) are made from two parallel glass
plates, 10 um apart, with liquid crystal molecules between
them. The glass is coated with a conducting material.
glass plate
7 The charge on an electron was originally measured in an
experiment called the Millikan Oil Drop experiment.
In a simplified version of this experiment, an oil drop with a
small electric charge is placed between two horizontal, parallel
plates with a large potential difference (p.d.) across them. The
p.d. is adjusted until the oil drop is stationary
For a particular experiment, a p.d. of 5100 V was required to
hold a drop of mass 1.20 x 10-14 kg stationary.
- +5100V
10 um
1.5 V
.-1.
2.00 cm
- oil drop
glass plate molecules
The molecules are positive at one end and negative at the
other. They are normally aligned parallel with the glass plates,
as shown.
The switch S is closed and 1.5 V is applied across the glass
plates.
(a) Calculate the electric field strength between the plates. [2]
(b) Explain what happens to the liquid crystal molecules. [3]
[Total: 5]
(a) Add to a copy of the diagram to show the electric field
lines between the plates.
[3]
(b) State whether the charge on the oil drop is positive or
negative.
[1]
(c) Complete the free-body force diagram to show the forces
acting on the oil drop. You should ignore upthrust. [2]
(d) (i) Calculate the magnitude of the charge on the oil drop.
acting
(ii) Calculate the number of electrons that would have
to be removed or added to a neutral oil drop for it to
acquire this charge.
[Total: 12]
[2]
8 With the aid of a diagram, explain how the electrical potential
varies within the space around a stationary electron. [5]
[Total: 5]
PANOS
ng
What have I studied before?
• Electric charges and their movement
Potential difference
Electrical energy
Gravitational potential energy
What will I study later?
• Charging and discharging capacitors
Generating electricity
• Alternating current and voltage
• Alpha particle scattering by nuclear electric fields
Accelerating subatomic particles using electric
fields
• Comparisons with gravitational fields
What will I study in this chapter?
• Electric fields causing forces on charges
Coulomb's law and how to calculate the forces
caused by electric fields
Uniform electric fields expressed in terms of
voltages
Radial electric fields generated by point charges
or charged spheres
How to calculate field strength and electric
potential
How to draw electric fields, including lines of
equipotential
Electric fields in combination
Millikan's oil drop experiment to find the charge
on an electron
33
7.1
Electric fields
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define an electric field
• use the equation E = 6 for electric field strength
describe the concept of a uniform electric field
use the equation E for uniform electric field strength
between parallel plates
A charged particle will feel a force when it is in an electric field.
To visualise the forces caused by the field, we draw electric field
lines which show the direction a positively charged particle will
be pushed by the force the field produces. As with magnetic field
patterns, indeed as with all field patterns - the closer together
the lines are, the stronger the field is. A stronger field causes
stronger forces.
The force, F, that a charged particle will feel is the electric field
strength (E) multiplied by the amount of charge in coulombs (Q),
as given by the equation:
F= EQ
From this force equation, we can also see how quickly a charge
would accelerate. Newton's second law is that F= ma, so we can
equate the two equation
F= EQ = ma
Pushing charges
Many machines function through the use of fast-moving charged
particles. For example, in a hospital X-ray machine high speed
electrons are crashed into a metal target in order to produce the
X-rays. So how do we cause the electrons to move at high speed?
A region of space that will cause charged particles to accelerate is
said to have an electric field.
EQ
So: a= m
WORKED EXAMPLE
electric field lines
tungsten
target
+45000V
(a) What force will an electron feel when it is in an X-ray machine's
electric field which has a strength of 4.5 x 10 Vm-l?
F = EQ
= 4.5 x 105 x -1.6 x 10-19
F=-7.2 x 10-14 N
—
—
X-rays
The minus sign indicates that the electron will feel a force trying
to accelerate it towards the more positive end of the field. This is
the opposite direction to the conventional field direction which,
like electric current, goes from positive to negative.
(b) How fast will the electron be travelling if this field accelerates it
from rest and it is within the field for a distance of 10 cm?
The kinematics equations of motion have v2 = 42 + 2as. 'From
rest' means that u = 0, so:
cathode
anode
fig A An electric field accelerates electrons in an X-ray machine.
v=v2a5 =
-
2EOS
m
2 x (4.5 x 105)*(-1.6 x 10-19) (0.1)
(9.11 x 10-31)
V= -1.26 x 108 msi
Again, the minus sign indicates that the motion is in the opposite
direction to the electric field, i.e. towards the more positive end
of it. Relativistic effects are ignored in this example.
Electric potential
In the worked example above, the kinetic energy gained by the
electron was provided in a transfer from electrical potential
energy that it had because of its location within the electric field.
Every location within a field gives a charged particle a certain
electric potential energy per unit of charge. This is called electric
fig B An X-ray machine.
34
THINKING
BIGGER
POWER LINE PROBLEMS W
In 2010, a 500 kV high voltage transmission line was proposed to carry electricity for 28 miles across
Washington State in the USA. The Bonneville Power Administration commissioned various reports
to investigate safety and other public interest issues related to the new power lines, to inform local
government officers. Dan Bracken, an independent scientific consultant, wrote a substantial report on
the impact of electric fields that might be generated by the power lines.
ELECTRIC FIELD
An electric field is said to exist in a region of space if an electrical
charge, at rest in that space, experiences a force of electrical origin
(i.e. electric fields cause free charges to move). Electric field is a
vector quantity: that is, it has both magnitude and direction. The
direction corresponds to the direction that a positive charge would
move in the field. Sources of electric fields are unbalanced electrical
charges (positive or negative) and time-varying magnetic fields.
Transmission lines, distribution lines, house wiring, and appliances
generate electric fields in their vicinity because of the unbalanced
electrical charges associated with voltage on the conductors. On
the power system in North America, the voltage and charge on the
energized conductors are cyclic (plus to minus to plus) at a rate of 60
times per second. This changing voltage results in electric fields near
sources that are also time-varying at a frequency of 60 hertz (Hz, a
frequency unit equivalent to cycles per second).
As noted earlier, electric fields are expressed in units of volts per
metre (V/m) or kilovolts (thousands of volts) per metre (kV/m).
The spatial uniformity of an electric field depends on the source of
the field and the distance from that source. On the ground, under a
transmission line, the electric field is nearly constant in magnitude
and direction over distances of several feet (1 metre). However,
close to transmission- or distribution-line conductors, the field
decreases rapidly with distance from the conductors. Similarly,
near small sources such as appliances, the field is not uniform
and falls off even more rapidly with distance from the device. If
an energized conductor (source) is inside a grounded conducting
enclosure, then the electric field outside the enclosure is zero, and
the source is said to be shielded.
Electric fields interact with the charges in all matter, including
living systems. When a conducting object, such as a vehicle
fig A Transmission lines can carry very high voltages, generating significant
electric fields.
or person, is located in a time-varying electric field near a
transmission line, the external electric field exerts forces on the
charges in the object, and electric fields and currents are induced
in the object. If the object is grounded, then the total current
induced in the body (the 'short-circuit current) flows to earth. The
distribution of the currents within, say, the human body, depends
on the electrical conductivities of various parts of the body: for
example, inuscle and blood have higher conductivity than bone
and would therefore experience higher currents.
At the boundary surface between air and the conducting object, the
field in the air is perpendicular to the conductor surface and is much,
much larger than the field in the conductor itself. For example,
the average surface field on a human standing in a 10 kV/m field
is 27 kV/m; the internal fields in the body are much smaller:
approximately 0.008 V/m in the torso and 0.45 V/m in the ankles.
Section 3.1 from Appendix E, Electrical Effects of 'BIG EDDY -
KNIGHT 500-KV TRANSMISSION PROJECT', by T. Dan Bracken, for
Bonneville Power Administration, dated March 2010, http://efw.bpa.gov/
environmental_services/Document_Library/Big_Eddy-Knight/pdf/Appendix E-
ElectricalEffectsCombined.pdf
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1 6.1
6.2
7.1
YOU ARE
HERE
12
7.3
8.1
44
7.1
Questions
Learning tip
Stokes' law
Sir George Gabriel Stokes investigated fluid dynamics and derived an
equation for the viscous drag (F) on a small sphere moving through
a fluid at low speeds:
F = 67Vr
where r is the radius of sphere, v is the velocity of sphere, and n is the
coefficient of viscosity of the fluid.
1 Fig C shows a positively charged oil drop held at rest between two
parallel conducting plates, A and B.
oil droplet
2.50 cm
For Millikan's oil drops, the density of air in the chamber is so low
that its upthrust is generally insignificant (although it would have
to be considered if we wanted to do really accurate calculations).
Under terminal velocity, the weight equals the viscous drag force:
mg = 677/term
where n is the viscosity of air, and r is the radius of the drop.
When held stationary by switching on the electric field and
adjusting the potential, V, until the drop stands still:
weight = electric force
VO
mg = EQ=
By eliminating the weight from the two situations, this means that:
VO
fig C
(a) The oil drop has a mass of 9.79 X 10-15 kg. The potential
difference between the plates is 5000 V and plate B is at a
potential of O V. Is plate A positive or negative?
(b) Draw a labelled free-body force diagram which shows the
forces acting on the drop.
(c) Calculate the electric field strength between the plates.
(d) Calculate the magnitude of the charge Q on the drop.
(e) How many electrons would have to be removed from a neutral
oil drop for it to acquire this charge?
6TH]Vterm
=
d.
6 TV/Vterd
or: Q=-V
Millikan could not measure r directly, so he had to eliminate it
from the equations. Further development of Stokes' law tells us
that a small drop falling at a low terminal velocity will follow the
equation:
2rg(poil - Pair)
Veerm =
which, if we again ignore the low density of air, rearranges to:
911 Vier
P=
97)
2gPoil)
Overall then:
6 TV)Ved /97/Verm
O=-
2g Poil)
Millikan did the experiment several hundred times, including
repeated measurements on each drop, over and over again letting
it fall, halting it with an electric field, and then lifting it up again
with a stronger field, before letting it fall again. From this data,
he found that the charges on the droplets were always a multiple
of 1.59 x 10-19C, which is less than 1% away from the currently
accepted value of 1.602 x 10-19 C. For this (and work on the
photoelectric effect) Millikan was awarded the 1923 Nobel Prize
for Physics.
38
7.1
2
Millikan's oil drop experiment w
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
describe the experimental set-up which Robert Millikan used to determine the charge on
an electron
explain how different areas of physics can be brought together in one experiment to solve
a problem
In experiments to determine the nature of fundamental particles, scientists can use a mass
spectrometer (see Section 7.3.3) to find the ratio of charge/mass for particles. This is a fundamental
property of a charged particle and identifies it uniquely, but until the determination of the value
of the charge on an electron, it was impossible to break down the ratio and find the mass of that
particle. In 1909, Robert Millikan developed an experiment which determined the charge on a
single electron
Although Millikan had a variety of extra bits and pieces to make his experiment function successfully,
the basic essence of the experiment is very simple. A charged droplet of oil has its weight balanced
by the force from a uniform electric field. (He also undertook a variation in which there is no field
and the terminal velocity is measured, and then one in which the field provides a stronger force than
gravity and the terminal velocity upwards is measured.) When oil is squirted into the upper chamber
from the vaporiser, friction gives the droplets an electrostatic charge. This will be some (unknown)
multiple of the charge on an electron, because electrons have been added or removed due to friction.
As the drops fall under gravity, some will go through the anode and enter the uniform field created
between the charged plates. If the field is switched off, they will continue to fall at their terminal
velocity
Learning tip
The content in this section has
been included to illustrate how
different areas of physics can
be brought together in one
experiment to solve a problem.
It is not required by the
specification.
vaporiser
fig A Millikan's oil drop apparatus
for finding the charge on an
electron. The chamber shown
was suspended in a trough of
motor oil to reduce heat transfer
within it, and thus reduce any
problems of convection currents
affecting falling oil droplets
within the chamber.
anode (+)
charged oil droplets
viewing microscope
variable p.d.
-
light source
cathode (-)
fig B Schematic of Millikan's oil drop chamber.
Electric fields
7.1
Questions
By reducing the separation of the spheres, you will see the angle of
the lighter hanging ball increase. You can investigate the force
between charged spheres and confirm that there is an inverse square
law involved, and that the force is proportional to the product of the
charges.
Fig D shows the forces on the hanging ball. By resolving and
equating the horizontal and vertical components, we can develop a
method for verifying Coulomb's law.
1 What is the force of attraction between a uranium nucleus (atomic
number 92) and an electron at a distance of 0.1 nm?
(a) What is the strength of the electric field caused by a gold
nucleus (atomic number 79) at a distance of 1 x 10-12 m (1 pm)
from the centre of the nucleus?
(b) What is the force of repulsion between an alpha particle and a
gold nucleus when the alpha passes by the nucleus at a distance
of 1 pm?
---
Explain a potential problem with the experimental set-up in fig B
when comparing with Coulomb's law that F==
(Hint: what would your ruler be measuring?) 476 am
----
L
-
Faulomb
-T
boulbant
-
I-
Estimate the distance that you float above your bed at
night as a result of the Coulomb repulsion between the
electrons in the bedsheets and those in your pyjamas.
WP
Jasmin and Izaac undertook an experiment to test Coulomb's law,
following the method of fig C. The measurements they took are
given in table A.
fig D Forces on the hanging charged ball.
The horizontal component of the tension balances with the
Coulomb force:
Fcoulomb = Tsino
And the weight balances the vertical component of tension:
mg = Tcoso
Dividing the two equations gives:
Fcoulomb Tsino
d/m
0.002
0.004
0.006
mg"TCOGA = tand
0.008
r/m
0.036
0.028
0.024
0.021
0.019
0.018
0.016
0.014
For small anglest
will need a long piece of thread to
allow this simplification to be made):
Fcoulomb d
mgI
mgd
0.010
0.012
0.014
Fooulomb =
1
0.016
table A Experimental results from a Coulomb's law experiment.
Draw an appropriate graph to analyse their results to show that the
Coulomb force follows an inverse square relationship.
Q.Q2 mgd
4 Ter2 L
For a fixed amount of charge on the spheres, you could vary rand
measured, from which a plot of against d should produce a
straight line. It is very difficult to specifically control the amount of
charge placed on the spheres, but having charged them both up,
touching one with a third, uncharged, sphere can remove half the
charge on that one. Doing this several times, and measuring din
each case, will allow you to confirm that Fcoulomb is proportional to
the product of the two charges.
43
Electric fields
7.1
potential, V This is similar to the relationship between force and field strength: field strength
is the force felt by a charged particle per unit of charge, expressed by the equation E = The
difference between that and a new location that the electron might move to is called the potential
difference through which the electron moves. You may remember (Book 1, Section 3.1.2) that we
previously defined potential difference for a device in an electrical circuit as the energy transferred per
coulomb of charge passing through the device. In an electric field, we can follow exactly the same idea
in order to find out how much kinetic energy a charged particle will gain by moving within the field. This
is given by the equation:
Ex= VQ
WORKED EXAMPLE
(a) What is the kinetic energy of the electron in part (b) of the previous worked example above?
Ex = mv2
=) (9.11 x 10-31) (1.26 x 10)
Ex = 7.2 x 10-15
(b) What is the kinetic energy gained by an electron as it is accelerated through a potential difference
of 45 kV?
Ex = VQ = 45 x 108 x 1.6 x 10-19
Ex = 7.2 x 10-15)
These two answers are the same because they are actually calculations of the same thing, looked at
from different perspectives.
Uniform fields
+2000V
- 2000V
TILL II
TI TT III
TLT III
III LIIT
12
TILL III
II II 11
IIIIIII
EHT
fig C The blue arrows show the direction of the uniform electric field produced between parallel plates that have a potential
difference between them. The dashed lines indicate the equipotential lines along which the potential is constant.
An electric field exists between any objects which are at different electrical potentials. Thus, if we
connect parallel metal plates to a power supply, we can set up a potential difference, and therefore an
electric field, between them. This is shown in fig C. The field is uniform if its field lines are parallel
across the whole field.
The strength of a uniform electric field is a measure of how rapidly it changes the potential over
distance. The equation which describes this divides the potential difference, V. by the distance over
which the potential difference exists, d:
WORKED EXAMPLE
In the X-ray machine shown in fig A, there is a potential difference of 45 000V between a cathode and
an anode, which are 10 cm apart. What is the electrical field strength between the plates?
F-V 45000
Em 0.1
E = 4.5 x 105V m-1
7.
14
Coulomb's law
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
make calculations of the electrostatic force between charged particles
verify Coulomb's law experimentally
Charged particle interactions
The attraction between a proton and an electron can be imagined as the proton creating an electric
field because of its positive charge, and the electron feeling a force produced by the proton's field.
(Note that it could also be thought of the other way round, with the proton feeling a force caused by
the electron's electric field.)
fig A A proton's field (shown in three dimensions) will cause a force on a negatively charged electron
The force between two charged particles, Q, and Q2, which are separated by a distance r, is described
by Coulomb's law and is given by the expression:
- QQ2kQ,Q
46,72 p2
This can be seen as a logical consequence of the equations we have already seen for electric fields:
EATER
So, for one charge Q, creating a radial field in which another charge Q, sits at a distance r from Q,:
0.0
F= EQ - 4160P2
Note that for charged spheres, the calculation of the force between them is also given by Coulomb's
law, but the distance is measured between the centres of the spheres.
Learning tip
Take care to correctly include the charge signs in the calculation of force between charges, as the sign of
the final answer will tell you whether they attract or repel. A negative force will be attractive, as the force is
then in the opposite direction to that in which the separation was measured.
WORKED EXAMPLE
F
=
What is the force of attraction between the electron and proton in a hydrogen atom?
r = 5.3 * 10-11m Q2 = 1.6 x 10-19C Q2 = -1.6 x 10-19
Q.Q2
4TEOP2
(8.99 x 10°) (1.6 x 10-19) (-1.6 x 10-19)
(5.3 * 10-1192
F=-8.2 x 10-'N
7.1
WP
Investigation
Investigating Coulomb's law
Assume each shoe atom electron repels a corresponding one in
the floor surface, and oxygen, with eight electrons, is the most
abundant element. So estimate the force per atom that is shared
between four electrons (with the other four being on the opposite
side of the atom at any given moment).
Foto
Felectron atom = 3.77 x 10-17N
Felectron = coulomb force repelling shoe electron and
floor electron - 9:02
4180
fig B Measuring the force between two charges.
A pair of insulated metalised spheres can be charged using a Van de
Graaff generator, or simply by induction using a charged plastic rod.
Clamping the spheres close to each other will cause a force between
them which can be measured using an electronic balance. By
adjusting the distance of separation and measuring the force at each
distance, this apparatus can be used to confirm that Coulomb's law
follows an inverse square law. See also an alternative method for
verifying Coulomb's law below.
Q1 Q2
(-1.6 10-19) (-1.6 x 10-19)
4TT Felectron 4* 3.14 x (8.85 x 10-12) (3.77 ® 10-17)
Levitation height: r = 2.5 x 10-6m
So the man will float a couple of micrometres above the floor
surface; a distance equal to about a tenth of the size of a human
red blood cell, or the size of a bacterium such as Escherichia coli.
There are a number of assumptions in this calculation, not least of
which is that the positive charge of the nuclei of the atoms involved
has not been considered. Also, the compression of atomic bonds
within each material will mean that the force is supported across
more atoms than just those considered. However, it is true that the
repulsion of atomic electrons, which increases with the square of a
decreasing separation, provides the majority of contact forces with
which we are familiar in everyday life, and genuinely does mean
that you can never truly touch anything!
WP
Investigation
Verifying Coulomb's law
In 1785, Charles Augustine de Coulomb published a paper in which
he provided experimental evidence for the equation to calculate the
force between two charges. His experiments involved measuring
the force between charged spheres on a torsion (rotating) balance
and fixed charged spheres. A simplification of his method, which can
be carried out in a school lab, is shown in fig C.
Everyday levitation
All materials are made of atoms, and the outer part of atoms is
considered to be the region of electron orbits - the location of the
negative charge. We can therefore imagine the top of any surface
to consist of a sheet of negative charges. So, the surface of the
floor and the bottom of a man's shoe will both be planes covered
with negative charge. The repulsion between these two surfaces
will cause the man to levitate ever so slightly above the floor,
rather than actually touching it.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Estimate the height at which a man levitates.
Estimate of man's weight = 800 N
Therefore each shoe supports 400N.
Estimate of shoe surface area = 10 cm by 30 cm
Area of shoe surface = 0.1 0.3 = 0.03 m2
Estimate of average diameter of atoms in each surface,
datom = 1.2 x 10-10m
Cross-sectional area of each atom = aratom
Aatom = 7(0.6 x 10-102
Aatom = 1.13 x 10-20 m2
Number of atoms in bottom surface of shoe =
area of shoe
area one atom
0.03
N =
force supported by shoe
Force supported by each shoe atom = =
N
= 1.51 x 10-16N
" 2.65 x 1018
0
10
30
40
50 60 70
1.13 x 10-20 ~ 2.65 * 1018 atoms
100
Fate
=
400
fig C A simple method to verify Coulomb's law.
1.1
WP
Learning tip
Uniform electric field strength can be defined in two ways:
Investigation
Investigating equipotentials
EF
EV
This gives rise to two equally valid Sl units for electric field strength:
NC- and Vm-!
Investigation
Investigating electric fields
fig E Apparatus for investigating equipotentials.
You can investigate how electrical potential varies across an electric
field by measuring the voltage between zero and the point within
the field that you are interested in. A simple experiment using
conducting paper and a low voltage power supply to set up an
electric field will allow you to map out equipotentials, and this will
enable you to produce a picture of the electric field. Again, you can
try it with differently shaped electrodes in order to see how they
change the field shape.
Questions
1 What is the force on an electron in an electric field of 300 V m-?
2
What is the strength of an electric field that will put a force of
1.28 x 10-15 N on a proton?
fig D Finding electric field lines in the lab.
Make sure you know how to use an EHT power supply safely before
conducting this experiment. Only use an EHT power supply provided
by the technicians.
You can investigate the shapes of electric fields using an EHT power
supply to provide a potential difference, and castor oil with floating
semolina to show the field lines. The semolina becomes slightly
charged, and the charges on the semolina grains cause them to line
up, thereby showing the lines of action of the forces produced by the
field. Try it with different shaped electrodes to see uniform and non-
uniform fields.
How much acceleration will an alpha particle undergo whilst in an
electric field of 10 kV m-l?
In the electron beam of a cathode ray oscilloscope, electrons are
accelerated through a potential difference of 3000 V, which is set up
between parallel plate electrodes that are 3 cm apart.
(a) Calculate the electric field strength between these electrodes,
assuming it is a uniform field.
(b) How much faster will the electrons be moving when they
emerge from this field?
(c) Draw a diagram to illustrate the field produced by these plates.
(d) Explain how the field's effects would be different if a proton
were placed in it.
Equipotentials
As we move through an electric field, the electrical potential
changes from place to place. Those locations that all have the
same potential can be connected by lines called equipotentials.
These are very much like the contours on a map, which are
lines of equal height, and thus indicate lines of gravitational
equipotential. The field will always be perpendicular to the
equipotential lines, as a field is defined as a region which changes
the potential. How close the equipotentials are indicates the
strength of the electric field, as this shows how rapidly the electric
potential is changing.
Learning tin
Field lines can never cross each other. Equipotentials can never cross
either.
Kev definitions
An electric field is a region of space that will cause charged particles
to experience a force.
Electric field lines are imaginary visualisations of the region of
influence of an electric field.
Electric field strength is the force-to-charge ratio for a charged
particle experiencing a force due to an electric field.
Potential is a measure of possible field energy in a given location within
that field. Electric potential is the energy per unit charge at that location.
Potential difference is the change in potential between two
locations in a given field.
Equipotentials are positions within a field with zero potential
difference between them.
36
