Capacitor mathematics
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
use the equations for exponential discharge in a capacitor resistor circuit
derive and use capacitor discharge equations in terms of current and voltage, and the
corresponding logarithmic equations
Discharging capacitor maths
Charge,
We have seen that the charging and discharging of a capacitor follows curving graphs in which the
current is constantly changing, and so the rate of change of charge and p.d. are also constantly
changing. These graphs are known as exponential curves. The shapes can be produced by plotting
mathematical formulae which have power functions in them. In the case of discharging a capacitor,
C, through a resistor, R, the function that describes the charge remaining on the capacitor, Q. at a
time, t, is:
Q=Qe-1/RC
where Qis the initial charge on the capacitor at t=0, and e is the special mathematical number
which is used in the inverse function of natural logarithms (e 2.718).
WORKED EXAMPLE
A 0.03 F capacitor is fully charged by a 12 V supply and is then connected to discharge through a 9000
resistor. How much charge remains on the capacitor after 20 seconds?
Initial charge, Q. = CV = 0.03 x 12 = 0.36C
Q = Q e-t/RC
O=0.36 x el-20/1900 * 0.03)) = 0.36 x el-20/27) = 0.36 x 0.477
Q=0.170
Voltage, V
The p.d. across a discharging capacitor will fall as the charge stored falls. By substituting the equation
Q=CV into our exponential decay equation, we can show the formula that describes voltage on a
discharging capacitor is in exactly the same form as for the charge itself:
Q = Qe-/RC and Q = CV
(which also means that initially, Q. = CV)
CV = CV e-HRC
from which the capacitance term, C. can be cancelled, leaving:
V = V.es/RC
WORKED EXAMPLE
A 0.03 F capacitor is fully charged by a 12 V supply and is then connected to discharge through a 9000
resistor. What is the p.d. on the capacitor after 20 seconds?
Initial voltage is the same as the supply at 12V.
V = V. ERC
V=12 x el-20/1900*0,03)) = 12 x el-20/2T) = 12 x 0.477
V = 5.7 V
55
_
7.2
3
Current, I
As we saw in Section 7.2.2, the discharging current also dies away following an exponential curve.
Ohm's law tells us that V= IR, and so Vo = IOR.
V = V.e-WRC
IR = loRe-/RC
from which the resistance term, R will cancel on both sides:
I = l,e-H/RC
WORKED EXAMPLE
A 0.03 F capacitor is fully charged by a 12 V supply and is then connected to discharge through a 9000
resistor. What is the discharge current after 20 seconds?
Initial voltage is the same as the supply at 12 V, so the initial current is:
Vo_12 -0,013 A
1o - R - 900
1 = le-t/RC
1 = 0.013 x el-20/(900x003)) = 0.013 x el-20/27) = 0.013 0.477
1 = 6.4 mA
WP
Investigation
Using a spreadsheet to investigate the time constant
In order to create a timing circuit that fulfils the needs of a certain situation (such as a car courtesy light
staying on for the desired length of time), we can model the circuit using a spreadsheet. This will then
allow us to type in different possible values for the circuit components and see what the outcome will be,
before building it. Fig A shows how such a spreadsheet might appear.
You can create the spreadsheet without doing any experimentation. Give the various cells formulae to
calculate what capacitor theory tells us will happen, using the mathematics on these pages. For example,
the cell giving the time constant, 7, does not require input from the user - it is programmed to display the
multiplication of the capacitance and the discharge resistance. This value is then used in the formula for
calculating the values in the current column, using the equation, I = loe-t/RC, or l = l,e-tr.
Show
Chart
Smart
Graphic
Capacitor discharge curves
10
Current (A)
0.03000
C. Capacitance (MF)
V, Power supply (V)
Discharge resistance (0
HNM
TE
0.01820
0.01417
0.01104
0.03503
0.03000
0.00521
0.00-406
0.00316
0.00246
0.00192
0.02500
on un
0.02000
Current (4)
18
19
0.01000
NNNNNNNNNN
NM + ANO
Time (*)
Fica
fig A A spreadsheet to calculate the discharge curve for a capacitor circuit (Microsoft Excel screenshot used
with permission from Microsoft).
56
TOPIC 7
Electric and magnetic fields
CHAPTER
7.2 Capacitors
Introduction
The touch screen on many smartphones works by measuring the capacitance of every point on a grid that covers the
screen. As your finger conducts electricity, touching the screen alters the capacitance at that point. This is measured as
a position on the grid of the screen so that the phone knows where you have touched and can follow your tactile
instruction. Capacitor-based touch screens cannot detect the touch if you wear non-conductive gloves, as the measurements
are based on how well the points on the screen can store charge, and how charge can escape when you touch it.
The touch screen is one of the more interesting applications of the capacitor. However, as they can store energy, act as timing
components, and smooth out varying currents, capacitors are found in almost all modern electronic devices.
In this chapter, we will see how electric fields drive electric charge to be stored on a capacitor, and how this simple process can
lead to some complex but beautiful mathematics governing the charge storage.
All the maths you need
• Recognising and use of appropriate units with prefixes (e.g. the microfarad)
• Use of calculators to work with exponential and logarithmic functions (e.g. charge remaining after a certain capacitor
discharge time)
• Understanding the possible physical significance of the area between a curve and the x-axis and be able to calculate this
area (e.g. finding the energy stored on a capacitor from a graph of voltage against charge)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. finding the initial discharge current from the exponential equation)
• Interpreting logarithmic plots (e.g. plotting logarithmic data from a capacitor discharge experiment to find an unknown
capacitance)
• Understanding that y = mx + c represents a linear relationship (e.g. plotting logarithmic data from a capacitor discharge
experiment to confirm the exponential relationship)
• Use of spreadsheet modelling (e.g. using a spreadsheet to model how discharge current changes with time)
.
ELNAS
Exam-style questions
7.2
5 A student needs to order a capacitor for a project. He sees
this picture on a website accompanied by this information:
capacitance tolerance +20%.
(iii) State what she should do to make her value for Tas
reliable as possible.
[1]
(c) For a capacitor discharging through a resistor, the potential
difference V across the resistor at time t is given by
V=Voe-t/RC
Explain why a graph of In V against I should be a straight
16V
10 000uF
line.
[2]
16V
10 000uF
(d) The designer uses the circuit to obtain the following
data.
Taking the tolerance into account, calculate
(a) the maximum charge a capacitor of this type can hold [3]
(b) the maximum energy it can store.
[Total: 5]
[2]
t/s V/V
0 12.00
5L 9.41
10
7.16
15 L 5.49
4.55
25 3.49
30 L 2.68
35 2.04
6
20T
A designer needs a circuit that will cause a delay in switching
off the interior light in a car after the door is shut.
She uses a circuit with a resistor and a capacitor. She knows
that the time constant is given by:
T= RC
where R is the resistance in ohms and C is the capacitance
in farads.
Plot a graph to show that these data are consistent with
V = Voe-T/RC
higher
resistance
digital
voltmeter
12V
220k
RE
100uF
With the switch in position X the capacitor is charged to
12 V. When the switch is moved to position Y the capacitor
discharges through the resistor and the potential difference
(p.d.) across the resistor falls steadily from 12 V.
(a) (i) Calculate a theoretical value for the time constant for
this circuit.
[1]
(ii) What is the significance of the time constant for such
a discharge?
[1]
(b) The designer decides to check the theoretical value for
the time constant Tusing a stopwatch, with a precision of
0.01 s.
(1) State why the voltmeter needs to have a high
resistance.
[1]
(ii) State why a stopwatch is suitable for measuring the time
in this context.
Use the extra column in a table like that above for your
processed data.
(e) (i) Use your graph to determine another value for time
constant.
[2]
(ii) Calculate the percentage difference between your value
from the graph and the theoretical value from (a) (i). [1]
(f) (i) Use your graph to determine how long it takes for the
p.d. to decrease to 5.0 V.
Add to your graph to show how you did this. [2]
(ii) The designer wants the p.d. to decrease to 5 Vin
about 12 s.
Choose the value of R she should use.
A 472
B 1002
C 150 k 2
D 330622
[Total: 17]
What have I studied before?
• Electric current as the movement of charge
Voltage as a measure of energy transferred by
charges
Series and parallel circuits, and their rules for
current and voltage
Potential dividers
The effects of electric fields on charges
What will I study later?
• Radioactive decay as an exponential function
Radioactive half-life as analogous to the time
constant in capacitor discharge
• Capacitors in series and in parallel (further study)
• Capacitor construction (further study)
• Capacitors in AC circuits (further study)
Experimental investigation of capacitor-inductor
circuits (further study)
What will I study in this chapter?
The role of capacitors, and how they charge and
discharge
• The energy stored by a capacitor
The significance of the time constant for charging
and discharging a capacitor through a resistor
The exponential functions governing charge,
voltage and current during capacitor discharge
The logarithmic functions governing charge,
voltage and current during capacitor discharge
01141
7.2
Capacitor basics
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. describe how capacitors can be used in a circuit to store
charge
use the equation for capacitance,
• use the equations for energy stored on a capacitor
flow towards the positive of the battery, resulting in positive charge
being left on that plate. The attraction between the opposite
charges across the gap creates an electric field between the plates,
which increases until the potential difference across the gap is
equal to the potential difference of the power supply
+ plate -plate
+
+
+
+
ili il
+
+
Storing charge
We saw in Section 7.1.1 that an electric field can cause charges
to move. Indeed, this is why a current flows through a circuit - an
electric field is set up within the conducting material and this
causes electrons to feel a force and thus move through the wires
and components of the circuit. Where there is a gap in a circuit,
the effect of the electric field can be felt by charges across this
empty space, but in general, conduction electrons are unable to
escape their conductor and move across the empty space. This
is why a complete conducting path is needed for a simple circuit
to function.
electrons
move
electrons
move
circuit
symbol
+
-
fig B A simple capacitor circuit.
A pair of plates such as this with an insulator between them is
called a capacitor. As we have seen, charge will build up on a
capacitor until the potential difference across the plates equals
that provided by the power supply to which it is connected. At that
stage it is said to be fully charged, and the capacitor is acting as
a store of charge. The amount of charge a capacitor can store,
per volt applied across it is called its capacitance, C, and is
measured in farads (F). The capacitance depends on the size of
the plates, their separation and the nature of the insulator between
them.
Capacitance can be calculated by the equation:
charge stored (C)
capacitance (F) =
potential difference across capacitor (V)
fig A An electric field will act across a space. You could test this by hanging a
charged sphere near the plates and observing the field's force acting on
the sphere.
WORKED EXAMPLE
(a) What is the capacitance of a capacitor which can store 18 mc
of charge when the p.d. across it is 6V?
Q 18 x 10
C=
ū6
- 3 x 10-3
However, charge can be made to flow in an incomplete circuit.
This can be demonstrated by connecting two large metal plates
in a circuit with an air gap between them, as in fig A. The circuit
shown in fig B is similar to the situation shown by the photo in
fig A. When the power supply is connected, the electric field
created in the conducting wires causes electrons to flow from the
negative terminal towards the positive terminal. Since the electrons
cannot cross the gap between the plates, they build up on the plate
connected to the negative terminal, which becomes negatively
charged. Electrons in the plate connected to the positive terminal
C = 3 mF
(b) How much charge will be stored on this capacitor if the voltage
is increased to 20V?
Q = CV = 3 x 10-3 × 20 = 60 x 10-3
Q = 0.06
50
7.2
Exam-style questions
4 The diagram shows a circuit that includes a capacitor.
[Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.]
1 A correct unit for the time constant in a capacitor discharge
circuit is:
A Am
Bs-1
Cs
DF
[1]
[Total: 1]
(a) (i) Explain what happens to the capacitor when the switch
is closed.
[2]
(ii) The potential difference (p.d.) across the resistor rises to
a maximum as the switch is closed.
Explain why this p.d. subsequently decreases to zero. [2]
*(b) One type of microphone uses a capacitor. The capacitor
consists of a flexible front plate (diaphragm) and a fixed
back plate. The output signal is the potential difference
across the resistor.
outer casing
2 A 100 mF capacitor is charged by connecting to a 1.5 V cell
and it stores 0.1125 J of energy. If the cell is replaced by a
3.0 V battery:
A the charge stored halves and the energy stored increases to
0.225 J
B the charge stored halves and the energy stored increases to
0.45J
C the charge stored doubles and the energy stored increases
to 0.225 J
D the charge stored doubles and the energy stored increases
to 0.45 J.
[1]
[Total: 1]
sound
o
utput
Waves
th
+ signal
3 Which of the following equations could correctly connect the
discharge current, 1, from a capacitor, C, through a resistor, R, at
a time, 1, if the initial discharge current was /?
AT= In 10RC
B 1= lo-RC
C In 1= In 1o - RC
D in 1 = In 1Inc
[Total: 1]
front plate back plate
The sound waves cause the flexible front plate to vibrate
and change the capacitance. Moving the plates closer
together increases the capacitance. Moving the plates
further apart decreases the capacitance.
Explain how the sound wave produces an alternating
output signal.
(c) A microphone has a capacitor of capacitance 500 pF and a
resistor of resistance 10 MO.
Explain why these values are suitable even for sounds of
the lowest audible frequency of about 20 Hz.
[4]
[Total: 12]
[4]
60
7.2
Capacitor charging curves
By considering the charging process in the same way as we did the discharge of the capacitor in fig
A, we can quickly work out that the charging process produces graphs such as those in fig D.
20.064
—
—
—
----
Charging current/A
p.d across capacitor/V
Charge on capacitor/mC
Time
Time
Time
(a)
(b)
(c)
fig D Charging curves for a capacitor connected to a 6V supply.
When charging a capacitor through a resistor, the time constant RC has exactly the same
implications. A greater resistance or a larger capacitance, or both, means the circuit will take longer
to charge up the capacitor.
Questions
| What is the time constant for a car's courtesy light in which a 2 mF capacitor discharges through a 15 ko
resistor?
Referring to the movement of electrons within the electric circuit of fig A, explain the shape of the
charging graphs in fig D, when the capacitor is initially uncharged, and the two-way switch is then
connected to point A.
3 Draw an accurate sketch graph for the current discharging through a 50 uF capacitor, previously charged
by a 6 V supply, and discharged through a 10 kA resistance, over a period of 2 seconds.
Key definition
Time constant is, for a capacitor-resistor circuit, the product of the capacitance and the resistance, giving a
measure of the rate for charging and discharging the capacitor. Symbol: tau, + (sometimes T is used instead).
Capacitors
7.2
0.0
Discharge current/A
p.d. across capacitor/V
Charge on capacitor/mc
Time
Time
Time
(b)
(c)
fig B Discharge curves for a capacitor through a light bulb.
The time constant
How could we make the lamp light up for longer, given the same power supply? There are two
possibilities:
1 store more charge on the capacitor
2 decrease the rate at which the capacitor discharges.
For the same maximum p.d., increasing the capacitance, C, will increase the charge stored, as
Q= CV. Alternatively, the charge would flow more slowly if the bulb's resistance, R, was greater.
An overall impression of the rate of discharge of a capacitor can be gained by working out the
time constant, T. This is calculated from 1= RC, and with resistance in ohms and capacitance in
farads, the answer is in seconds. In fact, the time constant tells you how many seconds it takes for the
current to fall to 37% of its starting value. We will see the mathematics of how 37% comes about
in the next section, but for now we just need to understand that RC indicates how quickly a charged
capacitor will discharge.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the time constant for the capacitor in the circuit shown in fig A?
T = RC = 100 x 100 x 10-6
T = 0.01s
Thus, in reality, the light bulb shown in fig A might flash on and off so quickly that we could not spot it!
Car courtesy lights
Modern cars often have a light in the cabin that comes on when the door is opened, and remains
on for a short time after the door is closed. This is useful in case it is dark, allowing the driver to
see to put the key in the ignition. The light functions by having a capacitor discharge through the
light bulb so that it dims and goes off as the charge runs out. In some cars, the length of time for
which the light remains on after the door is closed is adjustable and can be set by the vehicle owner.
This adjustable setting makes use of the idea of the time constant, RC. The owner will be able to
adjust a switch connected to the courtesy light circuit, which connects more or less resistance to the
discharging circuit. Thus for the same fully charged capacitor, the time taken to discharge completely
will vary and the courtesy light illuminates the cabin for more or less time.
fig C Capacitor discharge is used in a car courtesy light.
Thinking Bigger
7.2
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this journal abstract.
000000000
1. The extract opposite consists of information from a peer-reviewed scientific paper.
a. Discuss the tone and level of vocabulary included in the article - who is the intended
audience?
b. Discuss the level of scientific detail included in the extract, particularly considering
the intended audience.
If you search online for
'graphene ultracapacitors'
there are several articles
in more everyday language
that explain the essence
of this scientific paper, for
comparison.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
000000
2. a. Explain the meaning of the phrase 'specific capacitance' bearing in mind that it was
quoted as being 100 Fg!
b. How does the specific capacitance affect the potential use of a capacitor as an
energy store in an electric car?
3. Explain the importance of the resistance of a capacitor.
4. The fundamental point of a capacitor is to store charge. Graphene flakes have an
exceptionally high surface area fig A. Explain why the incorporation of graphene flakes
into capacitor construction could make very high capacitances possible.
Consider how we calculate
the time constant, 7, as
well as the idea of internal
resistance
Activity
Draw a flowchart detailing the steps that the authors say their paper will explain to a reader. Your
flowchart can use technical terms, but should be written in everyday language as much as is possible.
VUV05050
Your flowchart should be
in the chronological order
that the scientists would
have had to work on
building and testing the
materials and then building
their ultracapacitors.
Did you know?
Isolated capacitors can hold their charge for years without losing much at all. It is important that any unfamiliar
large capacitor is assumed to be fully charged, as it could give a shock if it discharges through you.
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
59
Capacitors
7.2
Investigation
WP
Investigating stored charge
A device that will measure the amount of charge directly is called a
coulombmeter. By charging a capacitor to various different voltages,
and discharging through the coulombmeter each time, you can
verify the basic capacitor equation that C = A graph of charge
(on the y-axis) against p.d. (on the x-axis) should produce a straight line
through the origin. The gradient of this line will equal the capacitance.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the energy stored on a charged 100 uF capacitor which has
3mC of charge?
(3 x 10-3)2
(100 x 10-6)
E = 0.045)
Investigation
Investigating energy stored on a capacitor
TELE
- 040
fig C Acoulombmeter will measure how much charge is stored.
Energy stored on a charged capacitor
A charged capacitor is a store of electrical potential energy. When
the capacitor is discharged, this energy can be transferred into
other forms. Our definition of voltage gives the energy involved
as E = QV. However, the energy stored in a charged capacitor is
given by E= QV. So where has the missing half of the energy
gone? This is a trick question, because our original equation
assumes that the charge and voltage are constant. However, in
order to charge a capacitor, it begins with zero charge stored on it
and slowly fills up as the p.d. increases, until the charge at voltage
Vis given by Q. This can be seen on the graph in fig D.
bulb resistance = R
total resistance = R
fig E Investigating how energy stored on a capacitor can be altered.
You can investigate how the energy stored on a capacitor changes
with the voltage used to charge it. Various combinations of identical
series and parallel bulbs will have different overall resistances. If we
add an extra parallel branch and increase the number of bulbs on
each branch by one, we can keep the total resistance constant, but
have more bulbs to light up. The three groups of bulbs in fig E all
have the same resistance, R. By allowing our charged capacitor to
discharge through these different groups of bulbs, and altering the
voltage to keep the bulb brightness constant, we can confirm our
equation E = CV2 for the energy stored on the capacitor.
Questions
Potential difference/V
| What is the capacitance of a capacitor which stores 2 coulombs of
charge for every 100 volts applied to it?
2
A 0.01 F capacitor is charged by and then isolated from an 8 V
power supply
(a) Calculate the charge stored.
(b) The capacitor is then connected across another identical
capacitor, which is uncharged. Describe and explain what will
happen to the charge and voltage on each capacitor.
3 How much energy is stored on a 50 pF capacitor which is charged
to 12 V?
4
Q Charge/Q
fig D Graph of potential difference against charge for a capacitor.
Each time we add a little extra charge (AQ) this has to be done
by increasing the voltage and pushing the charge on, which takes
some energy (we are doing work).
By finding the area of each roughly rectangular strip, we find VAQ,
which is the amount of extra energy needed for that extra charge.
Therefore, the sum of all the strips, or the area under the line, will
give us the total energy stored. This is the area of a triangle, so its
area is base x height, which from the graph is QV.
E=QV
Because Q = CV. you can also find two other versions of this
equation for the stored energy.
E = Q = (CV)V = { CV2
A 1200 uF capacitor is connected to a voltage supply until fully
charged with 10.8 mC. If this capacitor is then disconnected and
reconnected across a 10 W light bulb, how long could it light the
bulb for?
Key definitions
A capacitor is an electrical circuit component that stores charge, and
so can be used as an energy store.
Capacitance is a measure of the capability of a capacitor; the amount
of charge stored per unit voltage across the capacitor. It is measured in
farads, F.
Or: E=}QV=109) = 10
Capacitors
7.2
R is fixed, so In Ris the same on both sides.
. In 1= In 1,-
Applying the inverse function of natural logarithm gives:
I= le=H/RC
Capacitor calculus
The mathematics used here, calculus (including integration) is
beyond the scope of your examination specification in physics.
However, for those studying high level mathematics, this will
explain the source of the capacitor equations.
The equation for charge on a discharging capacitor is the solution
to a differential equation based on considering the rules for
voltages around the discharging circuit. With only the capacitor, C.
and resistance, R, in the circuit, the e.m.f. is zero. So
0 = Vc+ V
Ve= and V= IR
So:
.: -IR = =
The current is the rate of change of charge.
The '37% life'
If we consider the charge at time T.
= 9= RC SORE = RC =-1
Q = Q.e-RC/RC
Q = Qoe-1 and e-1 = 0.37
Q = 0.370.
The charge is 37% of its original value.
This shows that the time constant describes the decay of charge
on a discharging capacitor in just the same way as radioactive
half-life describes the number of radioactive nuclei remaining
(see Section 10.1.2), except that instead of describing the time
taken to reach half of the initial value, Tis the time taken to reach
37% of the initial value. This similarity comes from the fact that
radioactive decay also follows an exponential equation: N= N.e-st.
So: -RdQ0
dQ -
Questions
Integrating this from the start to time t, i.e. from capacitor charge
Qto Q:
QdQ ft -dt
0 Jo RC
gives: In Q - In Q. = pc
or: In Q = ln 0,- RC
applying the inverse function of natural logarithm gives:
Q = 0,e-1/RC
Use the data in fig A to produce a spreadsheet of data and generate a
graph of current discharge over time for this capacitor and resistor.
(a) Use your graph to find the current through the capacitor after
30 s.
(b) If this were a model of an automatic hand dryer circuit that
requires 4.0 V to operate, use your graph to work out how long
it will remain on.
(c) What would you change so that the dryer remains on for 30 s?
2
A 200 mF capacitor is charged to 8 V. If it is then discharged through a
4.7 resistor, what would the discharge current be after 3.5s?
3
In V = In V
RC
Logarithmic equations for voltage
We can take the log equation for charge and make substitutions
to find equivalent equations for voltage and for current.
In Q = ln Q - RC
In (CV) = In (CV) - RC
· In C + In V = In C +In V-RC
C is fixed, so In C is the same on both sides.
:: In V = In V-
Applying the inverse function of natural logarithm gives:
V = V.et/RC
By considering the equation y = mx + C, explain why the log
version of the capacitor voltage equation might be more useful
than the exponential version of the equation when conducting
an experiment to find the value of an unknown capacitance
discharging through a known resistor.
Key definition
Exponential curves are a mathematical function generated by each
value being proportional to the value of one variable as the index of
a fixed base: f(x) = bx.
Logarithmic equations for current
Similarly, we can take the log equation for charge and make
substitutions to find equivalent equations for current.
In V = In V-RC
In (IR) = In (1,R) - RC
. In I + In R= In lo + In R-
THINKING
BIGGER
ULTRACAPACITORS
Electric vehicles have not yet made a large impact in society, and their most commonly perceived
failings are a lack of overall energy storage, limiting range between charges, and long charging times.
Ultracapacitors have been suggested as a possible solution to these problems, as a replacement for
electrochemical rechargeable batteries.
PAPER-BASED ULTRACAPACITORS WITH CARBON
NANOTUBES-GRAPHENE COMPOSITES
In this paper, paper-based ultracapacitors were fabricated by
the rod-rolling method with the ink of carbon nanomaterials,
which were synthesized by arc discharge under various magnetic
conditions. Composites of carbon nanostructures, including
high-purity single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs)
and graphene flakes, were synthesized simultaneously in a
magnetically enhanced arc. These two nanostructures have
promising electrical properties and synergistic effects in the
application of ultracapacitors. Scanning electron microscope,
transmission electron microscope, and Raman spectroscopy were
employed to characterize the properties of carbon nanostructures
and their thin films. The sheet resistance of the SWCNT and
composite thin films was also evaluated by four-point probe from
room temperature to the cryogenic temperature as low as 90 K. In
addition, measurements of cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic
charging/discharging showed the ultracapacitor based on
composites possessed a superior specific capacitance of up to
100 F/g, which is around three times higher than the ultracapacitor
entirely fabricated with SWCNT.
Reprinted with permission from Paper-based ultracapacitors with carbon
nanotubes-graphene composites', Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 1/5, Issue 16
(Li, J., Cheng, X., Sun, J., Brand, C., Shashurin, A., Reeves, M. and Keidar, M.
2014). Copyright 2014.AIP Publishing LLC
fig A Electron microscope image of graphene flakes showing exceptionally
high surface area, due to extreme convolutions.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1
6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2 YOLARE 7.3
8.1
58
7.2
Charging and discharging capacitors
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• draw and interpret charge and discharge curves for capacitors
describe the significance of the time constant, RC
Capacitor discharge curves
WP
Investigation
Investigating current flow through a capacitor
A
B
current
sensor
10002
computer
datalogging
current
100 F =
fig A Investigating how the current through a capacitor changes over time.
You can investigate how the current through a capacitor changes over time by connecting a datalogger,
which senses current in series with the capacitor and then charge and discharge it. A suitable
set-up for this is shown in fig A. This set-up could be altered to log the potential difference across the
capacitor over time, using a voltage sensor in parallel across the capacitor. Make sure you have a good
understanding of this practical as your understanding of the experimental method may be assessed in your
examinations.
If, in fig A, the capacitor is fully charged, it will be at 6 V, and from Q = CV we know it will be storing
0.6 mC of charge. Recall that in Section 7.1.1 we looked at how the electrons in the circuit are
influenced by the electric field caused by the supply voltage, and their own mutual repulsion. If the
two-way switch in fig A is moved to position B, the electrons on the capacitor will be able to move
to the positive side of it by discharging via the lamp. As it has 100 12 resistance, their progress will be
slowed by the lamp, but they will still discharge, and the lamp will light for as long as some current
flows through it.
At first, the rush of electrons as the capacitor discharges is as high as it can be - the current starts at
a maximum. We can calculate this current using Ohm's law - it is 0.06 A. After some electrons have
discharged, the p.d. across the capacitor is reduced and the electric field, and therefore the push on
the remaining electrons, is weaker. The current is less and the light will be dimmer.
Some time later, the flow of electrons is so small that the current is down to a trickle, and the lamp
will be so dim that it may appear to be off. Eventually, the capacitor will be fully discharged and there
will be no more electrons moving from one side of the capacitor to the other, the current will be
zero. If we put this story together over time, the discharging current, p.d. across the capacitor, and
charge remaining on the capacitor will follow the patterns shown on the three graphs in fig B.
