3.2
Power in electric circuits
Combining these will give us the work done by a component in an
electric circuit:
W = V x / xt
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain work done by electric circuits
make calculations of work and power in electric circuits
explain efficiency and make calculations of it within electric
circuits
The measurement of voltages in electric circuits has shown us
that these deal with the conversion of energy by components.
As we saw in Section 2.2.3, energy must always be conserved,
and electric circuits are no exception to this. When components
convert electrical energy into other useful forms, they can be
considered to be doing work, as this is defined as a transfer of
energy
145
205
AS
fig B Electrical work done by a light bulb.
WORKED EXAMPLE
In fig B, if the bulb lights up for 4.85 seconds, how much work has
the bulb done?
W = Vit
W = 7.06 x 1.45 x 4.85
W = 49.6]
Electrical power
Power, P, is the rate of transfer of energy, or the rate of doing
work. In an electrical circuit, the energy is dissipated by a
component. The mathematical definition is:
fig A As part of this circuit, the heart will convert some electrical energy into
kinetic energy. The circuit is doing work.
PRE
OR
P-W
Incorporating the equation for work in a circuit from above:
P-VIE
t
P=VI
Electrical work
Work done has the symbol W, and as the equation defining
potential difference includes a term for the amount of energy
transferred, E, these two will be the same.
W=E
The equation for pd, in rearranged form, gives us:
W = VQ
The definition of current, in rearranged form, is the Quit equation
(see Section 3.1.1):
Q = I xt
Learning tip
Electrical work and power equations for all components:
W = Vit
P= VI
102
be
TOPIC 3
Electric circuits
CHAPTER
Complete electrical
circuits
Introduction
Depending on the exact model, a smartphone uses over a billion tiny electrical circuits in order to
WI
be able to perform a huge range of functions. However, it is fundamentally powered by a DC
battery that will supply a continuous voltage of approximately 4 volts. From this single electrical
quantity, the billion or more circuits can each be powered separately to perform their individual function.
For the complex machines we use every day, the individual components need particular currents and
voltages in order to function properly. In order to ensure that they receive appropriate amounts of these,
we must connect them together in circuits of the correct design and with appropriate other components.
The design of the overall circuit, and sub-branches of it, rests on the calculations of the electrical properties
at each point in the circuit.
In this chapter, you will learn how the fundamental electrical quantities inter-relate in a circuit, and how
they can therefore be altered by the design of the circuit.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the ohm, 2)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. finding a particular branch current from electric current rules)
Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. calculating the electrical energy transferred by
a component)
• Solving algebraic equations (e.g. the potential divider equation)
• Using ratios, fractions and percentages (e.g. the efficiency equation)
Determining the slope and intercept of a linear graph (e.g. finding the emf and internal resistance from
experimental results)
14
88
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
Questions
1 What is the internal resistance of a 6V battery if it supplies 5.8V to a
lamp when the current flowing is 0.40 A?
By considering energy conservation, we can draw up an equation
for the circuit that incorporates the internal resistance.
Le = SV
.. 8 = Vload + Vinternal
... E = Vload + Ir = IR + Ir
The circuit shown in fig B demonstrates what the mathematics
means practically. The voltmeter will be measuring the voltage
actually supplied by the cell, so that will be its pure emf minus
the pd across the internal resistance, or lost volts. However, as the
ammeter should have zero pd, the voltmeter will also be reading
the value of the potential difference across the variable resistor, R
E-V, VR
Or, in terms of the ammeter reading. I, and the voltmeter reading,
What is the internal resistance of a 1.5 V dry cell, that delivers 1.3 V
to a lamp which has a resistance of 5.0 ?
The starter motor for a car engine needs a very high current, for
example 100 A.
(a) Explain why a car battery should have a very low internal
resistance.
(b) Explain why the car's headlights are observed to dim if they are
on when the car's starter motor is used.
E - Ir = V
... ? = V + Ir
which is, again, a statement of energy conservation in this circuit.
A student investigating the emf and internal resistance of a dry cell
used the circuit in fig B, with the cell in the place marked by the
dashed lines. She collected the results in table A.
Plot a graph to find both the internal resistance and the emf of the
cell that the student tested.
Ammeter reading, I/A
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.80
1.10
Voltmeter reading, V/V
1.45
1.42
1.39
1.31
1.18
1.09
Investigation
WP
Investigating internal resistance
We can find the internal resistance for a source of emf such as a cell
experimentally. Using a circuit like that shown in fig B, we adjust the
variable resistor to change the current through the circuit, and at
each current value we record the voltmeter reading.
The equation we have previously seen for the quantities in this
circuit is:
8 - Ir = V
or:
V = -rl + E
Comparing this with the equation for a straight-line graph y = mx + C
shows us that a graph plotted with V on the y-axis and I on the x-axis
will have a gradient equal in magnitude to the internal resistance, r.
The y-intercept, C, here represents the voltmeter reading when no
current flows. If there is no current in the circuit, the internal
resistance can take no energy from the circuit, so there will be zero
lost volts and the voltmeter will read the full value of the emf. So, the
y-intercept is the value of the emf, e.
table A Current and voltage readings from a student experiment to find
internal resistance of a dry cell.
Kev definition
The resistance of an emf source is called its internal
resistance.
- gradient = -1
MMMM
fig C Graph of internal resistance investigation results.
101
What have I studied before?
• Energy transfers in electrical circuits
• Calculations of electrical power and energy
Explanations of the movement of charged
particles in terms of their material medium
Calculations of current, voltage, and resistance
Ohm's law in general and when it is, and is not,
relevant
What will I study later?
• Analysis of changes in electrical circuits using
datalogging and/or an oscilloscope
How to calculate the current and voltage averages
for an alternating current circuit (A level)
• The use of circuits involving capacitors (A level)
• How electromagnetic induction will generate an
electromotive force (emf) (A level)
The energy conservation implications of Lenz's
law in electricity generation (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
How the conservation of charge, and the
conservation of energy, affect the distribution of
currents and voltages around circuits
How resistances can be combined and separated
in series and parallel circuits
How internal resistance can affect the usefulness
of an electrical supply
How to calculate the transfer of electrical energy
and power, and the efficiency of an electrical
device or circuit
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
WORKED EXAMPLE
In fig B, what is the power of the bulb?
P = VI
P = 7.06 x 1.45
P = 10.2 W
Power dissipated by resistors
We can also write variations of the electrical power equation, substituting in terms from Ohm's law
so that we can calculate the power dissipated by resistors in a circuit.
P= VI
and
V = IR
If we only know current and resistance:
P = IR I = PR
Or, if we only know pd and resistance:
P=VxV 12
Learning tip
Resistor power dissipation equations:
P= 12R
P.12
Efficiency
Luman
1380
100
1000
WP
fig C Modern electrical appliances come with a label indicating their efficiency, so that consumers can choose good
value for running costs when making purchases.
From the equations above, we can easily calculate the work and power of electrical devices.
However, this calculation is relatively meaningless if we do not also consider the purpose of the
device. If most of the energy is not actually transferred into a form that is useful to us, then the
cost of that electrical energy will be wasted. We saw in Section 2.2.2 that the ability of a device to
convert energy usefully is called efficiency.
103
3.2
You will remember that efficiency is defined mathematically - and this applies to electrical energy
transfers exactly as it did to mechanical energy transfers - as:
useful energy output
efficiency =
total energy input
useful power output
efficiency =
total power input
The answer will be a decimal between zero and one. It is common to convert this to a percentage value
(multiply the decimal by 100).
WORKED EXAMPLE
In fig B, what is the efficiency of the bulb if it produces 3.57 joules of light energy per second?
useful power
total power input
efficiency =
efficiency - 10.2
3.57
efficiency = 0.35 = 35%
Investigation
Investigating efficiency
We can find the efficiency of an electric motor by measuring the electrical energy it uses, and by
comparing this with its useful energy output in lifting a mass against its weight to give the mass
gravitational potential energy.
7112
electric motor
fig D Finding the efficiency of an electric motor lifting a weight.
You switch on the motor and find the time (t) it takes to lift the known mass (m) through a fixed height
(Ah). During the lifting process, you measure the average pd (V) across the motor and current through it)
using an ammeter and a voltmeter. You use these measurements to calculate the total energy input and
the useful energy output for use in the efficiency equation.
useful energy output = gravitational potential energy gained = mgah
total energy input = electrical energy used = Vit
useful energy output mgah
motor efficiency =
total energy input Vlt
104
3.2
Series and parallel circuits
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
calculate currents, voltages and resistances in series and parallel circuits
derive the equations for combining resistances in series and parallel
The fundamental rules governing measurements in electrical circuits are the conservation of charge
and conservation of energy. These determine how currents, voltages and resistances change around
any particular circuit.
Current
The total amount of charge within a circuit cannot increase or decrease when the circuit is
functioning
Learning tip
WP
Currents are measures of charge flow through a component, so they must be measured in the
same line as the component, i.e. the ammeter must always be placed in series next to the component.
fig A Ammeters must always be in series with the component they are measuring
Currents in series circuits
Any group of components that follow in series in a circuit, with no junctions in the circuit, must have
the same current through them all.
A)1A
A)1A
A
fig B The current is constant throughout a series loop in a circuit.
Currents in parallel circuits
Whenever a current encounters a junction in a circuit, the charges can only go one way or the other,
so the current must split. The proportions that travel along each possible path will be in inverse
proportion to the resistance along that path. If the path has high resistance, the current is less likely
to go that way. However, the total along the branches must add up to the original total current.
90
3.2
2
Electrical circuit rules
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• understand how the distribution of current in a circuit is a
consequence of charge conservation
understand how the distribution of potential differences in a
circuit is a consequence of charge conservation
make calculations based on current and voltage circuit rules
In the circuit diagram of fig B, we could think about the current
entering and leaving the resistor. This is 0.8 A entering and
0.8 A leaving. If we added these together, accounting for the
direction:
lin + lout = 14 +-15 = 0.8 +-0.8 = 0
This trivial example confirms the rule at work in the resistor.
Similarly, consider the currents at the point where the circuit splits
to send current through the two bulbs:
A +-12+ -13 = 0.8 +-0.4 +-0.4 = 0
The same overall result would appear at any point in the circuit -
charge must always be conserved.
Gustav Kirchhoff was a Prussian physicist working in the middle
of the nineteenth century. He made important contributions to
several areas of physics, and there are also laws named after him
in spectroscopy and thermochemistry. The electrical circuit rules
presented here sometimes carry his name.
Electrical voltages rule
In order to conserve electrical energy around any closed loop in a
circuit, the sum of emfs is equal to the sum of the pds around that
loop. Note that a loop being considered might not be the whole of
a circuit – the only requirement is that the loop is complete. Note
also that the potential differences referred to here are defined as
being the products of component currents and resistances, as per
Ohm's law. So, if we isolate a particular closed loop, it may have
potential differences with positive values, and with negative values
when the current flows in the opposite direction.
fig A Gustav Kirchhoff presented the conservation of charge and of electrical
energy within a circuit as two laws of physics.
) V
= 0.85 V
V = 3.0V
V = 2.15 V
Electric current rule
Electric current rule: the algebraic sum of the currents entering
a junction is equal to zero.
El = 0
In order to conserve electric charge, the sum of all the currents
arriving at any point (such as a junction) in a circuit is equal to the
sum of all the currents leaving that point.
= 0.8A
fig C Voltages rule example circuit.
1 = 0.8AV
1 = 0.8 A
In fig C, consider the voltages around the closed loop consisting
of the cell, variable resistor and fixed resistor. We know V3 must
be 0.85 V, as all parallel branches must have the same voltage and
it is parallel to V4. Moving clockwise around the loop, starting at
the cell, the cell is the only emf, so the sum of all emfs is 3.0 V.
Following the same route to sumn the potential differences, we
ignore the cell as it is an emf, not a pd. This means the sum of the
pds will be
V = V3 + V4 = 0.85 + 2.15 = 3.0 V
As the current is flowing in the same direction through the cell
and both variable resistor and fixed resistor, these voltages are all
in the same direction, and so
Le = EV
1, = 0.4 A
1, = 0.4 A
fig B Current rule example circuit.
94
3.2
4
Emf and internal resistance
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain what is meant by internal resistance
. describe an investigation to determine an emf's internal resistance
make calculations of internal resistance
All components have some resistance. The best ammeters have such a small resistance that
the effect on their current measurements can be ignored, but it is not actually zero. Sources of
electromotive force (emf), such as batteries, will also have a small, but non-zero, resistance. The
resistance of an emf source is called its internal resistance. In most situations, the internal
resistance of an emf source will not affect the performance of a circuit. It may not even be noticeable.
However, as the power lost - energy wasted as heat - through a component increases with the current
through it (see Section 3.2.5), there can be a significant power loss when large currents are used. The
net effect of this energy usage by the emf source itself will be for it to supply a smaller voltage to the
rest of the circuit, which could hamper the circuit's performance. A large current through the internal
resistance could also damage the emf source as a result of ohrnic (resistance) heating.
internal
resistance,
emf, 8
fig A Any emf source could be considered to be a pure emf with a small resistive potential difference acting in series
with the emf.
The effect of having an internal resistance is that an emf will never be able to fully supply its notional
maximum voltage. There will always be a small drop in voltage over the internal resistance and this
drop will be bigger with a higher current. The pd over the internal resistance, r, can be found from
Ohm's law:
Vinternal = Ir
This pd is sometimes referred to as 'lost volts', as the circuit appears to have fewer volts in use by
the load than the emf should be supplying. A measurement of voltage across the terminals of a cell
powering a circuit would not measure the emf; it would measure the emf minus the lost volts. This
*terminal pd' would then be:
Vterminal = 8 - Ir
As all parallel branches have the same voltage across them, the terminal pd would also equal the pd
across the load resistance.
V terminal = Vload = € - Ir
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
fig B Circuit for demonstrating the effect of internal resistance
100
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
In fig G, the lamp is in parallel with the LDR, so will be powered by the same voltage as that across
the LDR. The resistance of a LDR increases if the ambient light level drops (darker surroundings
make its resistance go up). In bright conditions, the LDR has a very low resistance, so it takes a very
small proportion of the 12 V supplied by the battery. This will make the lamp very dim, probably to
the extent that it will appear to be off; it is not needed if the surroundings are bright. As conditions
become darker, the LDR resistance goes up, increasing the proportion of the 12 V supplied that drop
across it. This increases the voltage across the bulb, making it brighter. This circuit increases the
brightness of the lamp as the surroundings become darker.
Many electronic components have a switch on voltage of 5 V. These could be used with a
sensor in a potential divider circuit, and would only switch on when the sensor's resistance
reached a level where its pd was 5 V. Altering the resistor in this circuit would then control
the sensor level at which the electronic component was switched on.
WP
Questions
and R2 = 135 2. What
A potential divider circuit supplied by an emf of 8 V has two resistors, R, = 125
will be the output voltage across R ?
2
A potentiometer, as in fig F, is supplied by an emf of 15 V and has a 40 cm length of resistance wire. What
voltage would be tapped off as Vout if the wiper was placed 10 cm from the top?
3
Draw a potential divider circuit, like that in fig G, which will drive a fan motor in a conservatory faster as it
becomes hotter. (A standard thermistor has a higher resistance at lower temperatures.)
4
Fig H shows a length of resistance wire, with a contact that can rotate around a pivot to contact with
more or less of the resistance wire. Explain how this represents a potential divider circuit and what will
happen to the brightness of the lamp as the contact is rotated clockwise from the position shown.
600CODUCT
www
fig H
Kev definitions
A potential divider circuit is designed to provide specific voltage values by splitting an emf across
two resistors.
A potentiometer is a version of the potential divider in which a single resistance wire is used in two parts
to form the two resistances. A sliding connection on the wire can be adjusted to alter the comparative
resistances and thus alter the output pd from the potentiometer.
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
Questions
Resistors branch combinations
If a circuit has a mixture of series and parallel combinations, we
must use the rules we have for each group of resistors and then
use the rules again to combine these sub-totals.
1 How does fig B illustrate the conservation of charge in a circuit?
100k
2
If all four cell combinations in fig E were connected to each other in
series, what would be the total emf?
100k
100kg
3
If R3 has a resistance of 242, how much current flows in fig)?
| 12 V
230V-
fig 1 Calculate the total resistance of resistor groups separately, before using
the appropriate rule to combine the sub-totals together.
WORKED EXAMPLE
R
R
R
fig)
Use Ohm's law on the resistors in fig K to verify that the voltage
across parallel branches is always the same.
In fig I, we must calculate the total resistance of the parallel pair
first, and then add this total to the remaining 100k 2 that is in
series with the pair. The junction separating the single resistor
from the parallel pair is the clue as to how to separate the
calculations.
Parallel pair:
1 1 1 2 1
Rpara 100 100 100 50
.. para = 50 k12
12 V
0.12 A
10022
Total resistance
Rrotal = 100 kA + Rpara = 100 + 50
Rtotal = 150k
0.24 A
502
fig K
Quantity
Current
Series circuit rules
current is the same
throughout
Vtotal = V1 + V2
Parallel circuit rules
Motal = 11 + 12
5 What is the total current that flows in fig I?
Voltage
6 (a) What is the total current flow through the cell in fig H?
(b) How much current flows in the 48. resistor in fig H?
voltage is the same on
each branch
1 1 1
Rotal R R
Resistance
Riatal = R1 + R2
table A Summary of the electrical rules in series and parallel circuits.
Investigation
Investigating circuit rules
Make a complex circuit with various components in series and
parallel combinations. Using only ammeter and voltmeter, your
partner should be able to verify the circuit rules explained in this
section. If the resistances are large, the ammeter may need to be a
multimeter set to read milliamp currents.
Join various resistors in various combinations of series and parallel
connections. Your partner should calculate what they expect the
overall resistance of the combination to be. Check whether they
have calculated correctly by measuring the overall resistance of the
resistor combination using an ohmmeter.
93
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
However, they both have the same current passing through them, so I1 = 12.
V V2
..
RiR2
V,
R
..
V, R2
So the voltage is split in the same proportion as the ratio of the resistances for any values of resistance.
This means that for a known emf supply voltage, we can use carefully chosen resistances to share
the voltage and provide a specific value of pd on one component. If we then also remember that all
parallel branches in a circuit must have the same voltage, then any branch we set up in parallel with
that specific pd will also have the same voltage. Thus, we can set up a circuit to provide an exactly
chosen value of voltage to the parallel branch. Using variable resistors, this set up can then be used
to provide whatever voltage we choose. This can be particularly useful if our emf source is a fixed
value, like a battery, which can only supply, say, 6 V.
resistance
wire
fig C Adjusting the variable resistor alters the proportion of the voltage it takes, and so the pd that is left for the
resistance wire can be varied to any value we choose.
In Section 3.1.3, we saw graphs of current against potential difference for various components. In
order to undertake the investigation to produce these data, a potential divider circuit could be used.
Fig C shows a piece of resistance wire for which the current and voltage can be measured. If the
variable resistor is set to a high resistance, then it will have a high potential difference, and only a
small voltage will be left for the test wire. By decreasing the resistance of the variable resistor, the pd
across the test wire will increase, and we can adjust the variable resistor to set the values of pd on
the test wire to those we need for the I-V plot.
The potential divider equation
As the pd in a potential divider circuit is split in proportion to the resistances of the components, we
can calculate the pd across them mathematically.
pd across
resistance R
1000
12V (V
input pd
V
V
50002||
output pd
fig D Generalised potential divider circuit.
In the circuit diagram of fig D, we have the general terminology for the values used in calculations of a
potential divider circuit: Vout, R1, R, and Vin. Using these, we can calculate the pd across the component
of interest, which is usually drawn as the second resistance, using the potential divider equation:
R2
Vout = Vin
(R1 + R2)
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
+3A
2A
Current
recombines
here.
Current
splits
up here.
1A
fig C Current splits at circuit junctions, but the total current will remain the same, in order to conserve charge.
Voltages around circuits
Learning tip (WP
Voltages are measures
of energy change as charge
passes through a component,
so they must be measured
from one side to the other,
i.e. the voltmeter must always
be placed in parallel across
the component
fig D Voltmeters must always be in parallel across the component they are measuring.
Voltages in series circuits
Any group of emfs that follow in series in a circuit, with no junctions in the circuit, will have a total
erf that is the sum of their individual values, accounting for the direction of their positive and
negative sides. For example, two 1.5 V cells in a TV remote control will be in series, so that they
supply an emf of 3.0 V. This is also true for any string of potential differences in series.
- 1.5V -10 4.5V
- 3.0V THE 3.0V
fig E Emfs in series will add up. Take care to account for their direction, as cells in opposite directions oppose each
other and cancel out the erf they would supply.
0.2 A
0.2A
2 V
fig F Potential differences in series will add up. What would be the total pd across the two resistors in this diagram?
WORKED EXAMPLE
In the circuit diagram of fig F, the two voltmeters measure the potential differences in the circuit.
The total pd across both resistors will be the sum of their individual pds, so the total is 2V + 4 V = 6 V.
97
3.2
Voltages in parallel circuits
If the total voltage across any branch of a circuit is known, then
the voltage across any other branch in parallel with it will be
identical.
Resistors in parallel
The total resistance of a group of resistors in parallel can be
calculated from the equation:
1 1 1 1
Rtotal RR R
R 1622
R2422
R: 4802
fig G Both voltmeters here will read 6 V: the voltage is the same across all
parallel branches within a circuit.
240V
fig H Resistors in parallel follow a reciprocal sum rule to find their total
resistance
Resistance
Resistance can be calculated from Ohm's law as This can
be done for any individual component or a whole branch of a
circuit, as long as the voltage and current are known. This also
means that if we follow the rules for current and voltage variations
around series and parallel circuits, we come up with simple rules
for the total resistance in series and parallel combinations.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Resistors in series
Any group of resistances that follow in series in a circuit, with no
junctions in the circuit, will have a total resistance that is the sum
of their individual values. In fig F, we could use the total pd across
both resistors, and the current through them to calculate their total
resistance:
In the circuit diagram of fig H, what is the overall resistance of the
block of three resistors?
1 1 1 1
Rotal RRR
1.1.1.1
Rrotal 16* 24 * 48
1 3.2.1
Riot 48 48 48
1.6
11
Resta
48
total R = total V. 6
ī 02 = 3002
Rrotal
Rrotal = 80
You will see that this matches with our rule that
Rtotal = R + R2 = 10 + 20 = 300
Learning tin
Any combination of resistors in parallel will have a total resistance
that is smaller than the smallest individual resistance in the group.
Learning tip
Ammeters in series, and voltmeters in parallel, do not affect
total resistance and can be ignored.
WP
Derivation
Resistors in parallel will have a total current through them that is
the sum of their individual currents. The pd across them will be
the same for each branch. Take an example of three resistors in
parallel
Derivation
Resistors in series will have a total pd across them that is the sum
of their individual pds. The current through them will be the same
for each one. Take an example of three resistors in series:
potential difference: Viotal = V1 + V2 + V3
and V = IR
i Rtotal = IR+ IR, + IR:
current: Itotal = 11 + 12 + 13
and I =
VV.V.V
Rtotal R R2 R3
1.1.1.1
Riotal R. R2 R3
1
Rotal = R1 + R2 + R3
3.2
WORKED EXAMPLE
Using the values in fig D, we can find the pd across resistor Rz:
V=
VR
in * (R+R)
Vout = 12 *_500
(100+500) = 12
Vout = 10V
The potentiometer
supply
(wiper)
out
fig E A potentiometer allows us to supply any voltage up to the maximum provided by our emf source.
OV
OV
(common)
fig F Adjusting the position of
the slider (Wiper) on the
potentiometer changes its
position on the resistance
wire, so that the proportions
of resistance on either side
change, altering the potential
differences on either side of
the wiper.
The idea of using a potential divider to supply a variable voltage as required has been
incorporated into an electrical component called the potentiometer. A moveable contact
can slide over a fixed length of resistance wire, adjusting the length that is on either side of this
'wiper'. The two lengths of wire are the two resistors in our potential divider circuit. Adjusting their
relative lengths alters their relative resistances and hence the voltage across each. If we want to
power a separate circuit with a variable voltage, we connect it across one side of the potentiometer.
This is shown in fig F, where we would connect the right-hand side connections across R to our
main circuit. The blocks marked R and R are a continuous piece of resistance wire, which will be
split into two resistances by the position of the wiper. Adjusting the wiper up and down allows us to
tap off any desired voltage up to the maximum of supply.
Potential dividers in sensor circuits
If one of the resistors in a potential divider is a sensor component (such as thermistor or LDR) then
we can use its changing resistance to control an external circuit.
fig G A sense and control Circuit which makes the light brighter as the ambient light level drops.
98
Thinking Bigger
| 3.2
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the press release.
1. The extract opposite consists of an article from the News section of the NASA website.
Consider the extract and comment on the type of writing that is used in each case.
Try and answer the following questions:
a. Discuss the level of scientific detail included in the article, particularly considering the
intended audience.
b. Explain three different reasons why NASA would post this news article at all.
Think about what NASA
might expect to gain
from this being made
public information. NASA
is the American space
agency – the National
Aeronautics and Space
Administration.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in
this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the
answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work in context with what
you have already learned in your course.
158050005706800
2. Curiosity rover is powered by a radioisotope electricity generating unit, which has a
power of 110 watts when functioning correctly. What would be the current through the
main 32 volt power bus that distributes all of the electrical power?
3. The power bus uses potential dividers to provide the appropriate voltage to each
separate electrical circuit from its basic 32 V supply.
a. The article refers to an earlier voltage drop incident from the standard of 16 V down
to 11 V. Suggest two resistance values that could be used in a potential divider, from the
main power bus supply, to give an output voltage equal to 16V.
b. If a 'soft short' had caused that drop down to 11 V, suggest what the resistance of the
short circuiting object would be, based on your answer to part (a).
c. What further resistance would another soft short object need to further reduce the
voltage from 11 V down to 4V?
4. NASA claim that the rover can function perfectly normally across these variations in
supply voltage
a. Why would it be important that the plutonium cell generating emf has as low a
resistance as possible, especially in the event of a short circuit reducing the overall
resistance?
b. Explain how an item of debris touching electrical circuitry could reduce the
resistance of that circuit.
Choose any values
of R and R for your
potential divider that
will share the voltage to
give the correct output
values. Use your initial
Suggested values as a
basis for answering all
parts of the question.
Activity
Once the problem with Curiosity's voltage supply was determined and rectified, NASA needed to produce
another press release explaining this. Prepare a half page of text to be included in the second press release
which explains how the materials used in the electric circuitry on the rover will be affected by the cold
temperatures on Mars. Particularly concentrate your explanation on the electrical properties of the
materials.
00000000000000
The 'flying bus' system
uses a number of
different available
resistances to change
how the voltage is
divided, depending on
the emf available. Some
of the components will
be made from metal,
and some will be made
from semi-conductors.
The temperature on the
surface of Mars ranges
from 20°C to -150°C,
with -55 °C being a
typical value.
From a news story on the website of NASA, www.jpl.nasa.gov/news
ARE
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
107
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
Questions
In fig D, use Ohm's law to find the current through ammeter Az.
Next, consider just the closed loop containing the fixed resistor
and the lamp. If Xe = SV, and there are no emfs, the pds must
total zero. Starting at point A and moving clockwise around the
loop, the current moves through the lamp, which is measured at
V.= 0.85 V. Continuing to point B and then back up to complete
the loop at A means going through the fixed resistor against the
flow of the current. This means the pd will be negative, although
also 0.85 V. So in this consideration, Vj = -0.85 V.
V = V3+V4= -0.85 +0.85 = 0
= IV
2
The current through the cell in fig Dis 1.35 A. Use your answer
from question 1 to show that the circuit junction between the two
ammeters in fig D conserves current.
Demonstrate by calculation that the lower loop in the circuit in
fig D conserves energy
4 Find the emf of the cell in fig E.
H---TA
Voltages rule with calculated pds
Potential differences are the product of currents passing through
resistances, in order to use up electrical energy. Thus, each pd
could be calculated from Ohm's law as V = IR. So this becomes:
Le = XIR
0.38 A
0.38 A
R = 7.522
1022
2022
1 = 0.45 A (A)
R
= 2.5.12
KR
fig E Using the voltages circuit rule.
4)
R = 5.00
11
27
Kev definitions
Electric current rule
The algebraic sum of the currents entering a junction is equal to
zero.
XI = 0
Voltages circuit rule
Around a closed loop, the algebraic sum of the emfs is equal to the
algebraic sum of the pds.
Is = EIR
V = 4.5 V
fig D Confirming X8 = XIR.
In fig D, we can confirm the voltages rule around the upper closed
loop, through the cell, ammeter Aj, lamp and variable resistor. The
only emf is the cell, and this will have an emf of 4.5 V, as shown
on the voltmeter at the bottom of the diagram.
Le = 4.5 V
Ammeters have zero resistance, and so A, contributes nothing to
the sum of pds. The current must be the same through the lamp
and the variable resistor, so the sum of the potential differences
will be calculated from:
XIR = 1, R1 + R2 = (0.45 x 7.5) + (0.45 x 2.5) = 3.375 + 1.125
SIR = 4.5 V
. Le = XIR
95
3.2
Potential dividers
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. describe and explain potential divider circuits
make calculations in potential divider circuits
explain uses for potential divider circuits
NNNNNN
fig A Fixed emfs can be problematic when components require a lower voltage.
We have seen that all the voltage supplied by emfs in a circuit loop must be used by components as
potential differences at other points around the circuit loop. The way that the voltage splits up is in
proportion to the resistances of the components in the circuit loop, as shown in fig B. The voltages
across the two resistors must add up to 6 V. The 20 resistor has twice the resistance, so takes twice
the voltage of the 10 resistor. This is a potential divider circuit.
6V
-E----A
0.2A
0.2A
100
200
2V
fig B All of the 6 volts supplied by the battery must be used up by the resistors. The total pd of 6V is split into 2 V and
4V in proportion to their resistances. Ammeters have zero resistance, so use zero energy and have zero pd.
Ohm's law explains why the voltage is split in proportion to the resistance. Consider the resistances
and voltages in fig B in more general terms, as R1 (for the 10 resistor) and R. and their
corresponding pds V and V2. This will make the calculation valid for all values of resistances, and
calculating the current through each one gives:
1 and 12 =
96
3.2 Exam-style questions
1 Which of the following is an expression for calculating the
power in an electrical circuit?
(a) Ext
(b) VXI
(c) VxIxt
(d) QXI Xt
[1]
[Total: 1]
The current in lamp A is ........... ............ the
current in lamp B.
The pd across lamp A is..
....... the pd
across lamp B.
The resistance of lamp A is ...
............ the
resistance of lamp B.
(b) The same bulbs are now connected in parallel with the battery
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
HR..
2 Three 12 12 resistors are connected together. Which value
below could not be the total resistance of the combination?
(a) 20
(b) 40
(c) 81
(d) 180
[1]
[Total: 1]
lamp B
lamp A
State which bulb will be brighter and explain your answer. [3]
[Total: 6]
3 A 6 V emf cell lights a filament bulb. Current and potential
difference readings on the filament bulb are: V = 5.8 V,
1=0.44 A. What is the internal resistance of the cell?
(a) 0.2012
(b) 0.45.2
(c) 7.82
(d) 13.62
[Total: 1]
[1]
6 A student is asked to explain which of two filament lamps will
be brighter when they are connected in parallel across a power
supply. She is told that the resistance of lamp A is greater than
the resistance of lamp B.
The student wrote the following explanation that contains
some mistakes:
"The current is the same in both lamps. Because lamp A has a
higher resistance, it is harder for the electrons to move through
this lamp so they will lose more energy. Lamp A will therefore be
brighter than lamp B.
Write a correct explanation.
[5]
[Total: 5]
4 The current / in a length of aluminium of cross-sectional area
A is given by the formula
I=nev A
where e is the charge on an electron.
(a) State the meanings of n and v.
(b) Show that the units on the left hand side of the equation are
consistent with those on the right hand side.
[Total: 5]
[2]
7 A circuit is set up as shown in the diagram. The battery has
negligible internal resistance.
[3]
5 (a) Two lamps A and B are connected in series with a battery.
8002
-
-
-
-
9V :
4022
lamp B
lamp A
Lamp B glows more brightly than lamp A. Complete each of
the sentences by choosing one of the phrases in the box. [3]
| equal to greater than less than
(a) Calculate the potential difference across the 40 12
resistor
(b) A thermistor is connected in parallel with the 401
resistor as shown.
[2]
108
Exam-style questions
3.2
800
(1) By mistake, the kettle is connected to the 110 V supply.
Assuming that the working resistance of the kettle
does not change, calculate the time it would take for
the same amount of water to reach boiling point. [3]
(ii) Explain what might happen if a kettle designed to
operate at 110 V is connected to a 220 V supply. [2]
[Total: 9]
cu to
The thermistor is initially at a temperature of 100°C and its
resistance is 20 1. As the thermistor cools down, its resistance
increases.
Explain what happens to the current through the battery as the
temperature of the thermistor decreases.
[Total: 5]
10 Mobile phones have a rechargeable battery which is
recharged by means of a mains adaptor. One such adaptor
has an input power of 4.8 W at a voltage of 230 V.
(a) Calculate the input current to the adaptor when it is
in use.
[2]
(b) The adaptor's output is labelled as 5 V 0.1 A 0.5 VA.
(1) Show that the unit V A is equivalent to the watt. [1]
(ii) Calculate the efficiency of the adaptor.
[2]
(iii) Suggest a reason why the efficiency is less than
100%.
[Total: 6]
[3]
11 Electrically heated gloves are used by
skiers and climbers to provide extra
warmth for their hands.
Each glove has a heating element of
resistance 3.6 1. Two cells each of
e.m.f. 1.5 V and internal resistance 0.21
are used to operate each heating element.
8 Many computers operate through an uninterrupted power
supply (UPS) to protect them and the information stored on
them from power surges or power cuts. A UPS will run the
computer from the mains supply until it detects a problem and
then the computer will run off the UPS's rechargeable battery.
A UPS is rated by the maximum power that it can provide to
the computer. The unit that is used is the volt-amp (VA).
(a) Use expressions for potential difference and current to
show that the volt-amp is equivalent to the watt. [3]
(b) Each cell of the rechargeable battery has an internal
resistance. An advertisement for a UPS states that, at an
output power to the computer of 700 W, it can provide a
continuous supply for 7 minutes.
(i) Calculate how much energy is provided in this time. [2]
(ii) The advertisement also states that if the output power
is halved, the supply will last for 23 minutes. Without
doing any calculations, explain why halving the power
output more than doubles the time.
[3]
[Total: 8]
-
-
-
1.5V
-
-
-
-
-
1.5V
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
22
-
H0.29
-
-
- - -
-
-
-
-
r -
3.622
9 (a) A kettle is rated at 1 kW, 220 V.
Calculate the working resistance of the kettle.
(b) When connected to a 220 V supplied, it takes 3 minutes for
the water in the kettle to reach boiling point.
Calculate how much energy has been supplied.
(c) Different countries supply mains
electricity at different voltages.
Many hotels now offer a choice
of voltage supplies as shown
in the photograph.
(a) When the switch is closed:
(i) Calculate the total resistance in the circuit
(ii) Calculate the current in the heating element
(iii) Calculate the power output from the heating element.
[2]
(b) When in use the internal resistance of each cell gradually
increases
State and explain the effect this will have on the power
output of the heating element.
[Total: 8]
[3]
12 Explain how the current and voltage rules for electrical
circuits are expressions of the conservation of charge and
the conservation of energy.
[Total: 6]
[6]
109
BIGGER
CURIOUS VOLTAGE DROP O
One of the most important components for robotic spacecraft is their electrical power supply.
The electrical system on NASA's Mars explorer, Curiosity, is designed to function over a large range
of voltages, in case of supply disruption.
ROVER TEAM WORKING TO DIAGNOSE
ELECTRICAL ISSUE
The team detected a change in the voltage difference between the
chassis and the 32-volt power bus that distributes electricity to systems
throughout the rover. Data indicating the change were received on
Sunday, during Curiosity's 456th Martian day. The level had been
about 11 volts since landing day, and is now about 4 volts. The rover's
electrical system is designed with the flexibility to work properly
throughout that range and more - a design feature called 'floating bus.'
A soft short can cause such a voltage change. Curiosity had already
experienced one soft short on landing day in August 2012. That one
was related to explosive-release devices used for deployments shortly
before and after the landing. It lowered the bus-to-chassis voltage from
about 16 volts to about 11 volts but has not affected subsequent rover
operations.
The analysis work to determine the cause of the voltage change has
gained an advantage from an automated response by the rover's
onboard software when it detected the voltage change on Nov. 17. The
rover stepped up the rate at which it recorded electrical variables, to
eight times per second from the usual once per minute, and transmitted
that engineering data in its next communication with Earth. That data
was quite helpful,' Zimmerman said.
fig A This self-portrait of NASA's Mars rover Curiosity combines 66 exposures
taken by the rover's Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI) during the 177th
Martian day, or sol, of Curiosity's work on Mars (Feb. 3, 2013).
Science observations by NASA's Mars rover Curiosity have been
suspended for a few days while engineers run tests to check possible
causes of a voltage change detected on Nov. 17.
"The vehicle is safe and stable, fully capable of operating in its present
condition, but we are taking the precaution of investigating what may
be a soft short,' said Mars Science Laboratory Project Manager Jim
Erickson at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
A 'soft' short is a leak through something that's partially conductive
of electricity, rather than a hard short such as one electrical wire
contacting another.
The electrical issue did not cause the rover to enter a safe-mode
status, in which most activities automatically cease pending further
instructions, and there is no indication the issue is related to a computer
reboot that triggered a 'safe-mode' earlier this month.
NASA's Mars Science Laboratory Project is using Curiosity inside Gale
Crater to assess ancient habitable environments and major changes in
Martian environmental conditions. JPL, a division of the California
Institute of Technology in Pasadena, built the rover and manages the
project for NASA's Science Mission Directorate in Washington.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
Yo
HER
106
Complete electrical circuits
3.2
Questions
1 How much work is done by the resistor in the circuit in fig E if the circuit is switched on for 11 seconds?
power supply
ammeter
1.8
resistor
w
1.03
voltmeter
fig E A resistor circuit.
2 What is the power dissipated by the resistor in fig E?
3 What power is dissipated by a 4700 resistor when:
(a) current of 1.76 A passes through it?
(b) it is measured with a pd of 9.0 V?
4
(a) What is the efficiency of the electric heater in fig F?
(b) Why would your answer to part (a) be the same if you consider the heater switched on for one hour,
and if you consider it switched on for two hours?
100 J of 1J of light 4J of sound energy
electrical
energy
useful energy
output
energy
input
95 J of heat
energy
fig F Energy flows through an electric heater.
Compact fluorescent lamps have a tube containing a gas, which glows when electricity passes through it.
These are much more efficient than filament, lamps in which a metal wire glows when it is red hot due
to the ohmic heating current flow through it. Explain why compact fluorescent lamps are much more
efficient than filament lamps.
Kev definitions
The effectiveness of a machine at converting energy usefully is called efficiency:
efficiency - useful work done
total energy input
useful energy output
efficiency =
total energy input
105
