THINKING
BIGGER
END OF THE WORLD?
The 1998 science fiction movie, Armageddon, starring Bruce Willis, was released within two months
of the movie Deep Impact starring Robert Duvall, also science fiction.
OCEANS RISE, CITIES FALL,
HOPE SURVIVES.
ARMAGEDDON
DEEPIMPIAGT
Deep Impact
Leo Biederman (Elijah Wood) discovers a new comet at his
school astronomy club. When the discovery is submitted to an
astronomer, he races to warn people about it, but is killed in a car
crash. A reporter, Jenny Lerner (Tea Leoni) is investigating an
affair by a member of the government. He mysteriously resigned,
claiming he wanted to spend time with his family. Jenny confronts
him and discovers the secret of the comet - it is on a collision
course with the Earth. She is summoned to see President Tom
Beck, by black SUVs crashing into her car. The President (Morgan
Freeman) asks her to keep the prospect of this Extinction Level
Event a secret. Jenny insists that it must be made public, and she
forces a press conference. There is confusion in Leo's family,
and home town, as the President claims he was the discovering
astronomer and that he died a year earlier. President Beck explains
that there is now a mission called Messiah to intercept the comet
and destroy it. The alternative, should the mission fail, is for a
selection of one million people to be made, who will take cover
underground and continue humanity in the future. People over
50 years old will be excluded from the lottery for a place in the
caves. Jenny has a number of family and personal travails to
deal with alongside her reporting of the Messiah mission. As the
astronauts, led by Captain Tanner (Robert Duvall) say farewells to
their families and set off, many people wonder if the mission will
succeed, and what their futures may hold.
JULTIT
fig A Armageddon, starring Bruce Willis, was a box office rival to Deep Impact
with Robert Duvall.
Armageddon
A huge comet is headed for Earth. As it does not consist of one big
piece, but of a cloud of rather small pieces plus a main rock the
size of Texas, little impacts are recorded long before the big one is
scheduled for collision with Earth. Harry S. Stamper and his team
of misfit drillers are selected to land on the main comet as they
are the only ones who can work the special drill Harry developed.
Their mission is to drill 800 ft into the comet to place a nuclear
explosive device. The explosion of the bomb will break the comet
in two, and the two pieces will pass Earth on both sides. This task
has to be accomplished before a certain 'dead line', or the comet
parts will not fly by, but hit Earth.
• Extract from the IMDb website, a user posted plot summary by Julian Reischl.
From the notes of an anonymous movie reviewer.
Where else will I encounter
these themes?
Book 1
6.1
YOU ARE 6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
HERE
16
Further momentum
6.7
Questions
| (a) What is the impulse needed to stop a car that has a momentum of 22 000 kgms!?
(b) If the car brakes could apply a force of 6800 N, how long would it take to bring the car to a stop?
In a pool shot, the cue ball has a mass of 0.17 kg. It travels at 6.00 ms and hits the stationary black ball in
the middle of one end of the table. The black ball, also of mass 0.17 kg, travels away at 45° and 4.24 ms
ending up in the corner pocket.
(a) By resolving the components of the black ball's momentum find out what happens to the cue ball.
(b) Is this an elastic or inelastic collision?
1.18 m
0.59 m
0.59 m
fig H 2D momentum calculations can be very important in winning at pool.
3
Calculate how fast the impactor spacecraft in fig E would have to be travelling if it is to alter the Apophis
asteroid's trajectory by one degree. Comment on the answer.
For the experimental set up shown in fig G, suggest two improvements that could be made in order to
improve the accuracy of the resolved vectors that would be observable on the video stills.
Key definition
The impulse is force acting for a certain time causing a change in an object's momentum.
impulse = Fx At
TOPIC 6
Further mechanics
6.1 Further momentum
Introduction
Acceleration, which can be considered as a change in momentum per unit mass, can often be more exciting than basic
WP
calculations such as calculating the changing speed of a car. Curling has become very much a mainstream sport in
recent years, and in the UK it is particularly popular in Scotland, which is arguably the original home of the game.
Curling, in a similar manner to snooker, pool and bowls, relies very heavily on the ideas of conservation of momentum and
elastic collisions. Players deliberately collide the stones in order to knock their opponents' stones out of the way, and to ensure
their own stone finishes in a winning position. More subtly, the friction with the ice causes a change in momentum to slow the
stone to a stop.
In this chapter, you will learn about the way forces can change the momentum of an object over time. The chapter will also
cover how kinetic energy changes in different types of collisions, whilst momentum is conserved. All of this will be extended to
events happening in two dimensions, so vector addition and the resolving of vectors will be revisited in order to make the
necessary calculations.
All the maths you need
• Use of trigonometric functions (e.g. finding components of momentum vectors)
• Use of Pythagoras' theorem (e.g. finding velocity as a vector sum)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. rearranging the impulse equation)
Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. finding the velocity after a collision)
• Visualising and representing 2D forms (e.g. drawing a 2D momentum diagram for a collision between meteors)
6.
11
Energy in collisions
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain the difference between elastic and inelastic collisions
make calculations based on the conservation of linear
momentum to determine energy changes in collisions
Inelastic collisions
In a crash between two dodgems at the fair, the total momentum
after the collision must be identical to the total momentum prior
to it. However, if we calculate the total kinetic energy before and
after, we invariably find that the total is reduced by the collision.
Some of the kinetic energy is transferred into other forms such
as heat and sound. A collision in which total kinetic energy is not
conserved is called an inelastic collision.
derive and use the equation for the kinetic energy of a
non-relativistic particle
Inelastic collision example
before
We have seen in Book 1, Chapter 2.3 that linear momentum
is always conserved in any collision between objects, and this is
responsible for Newton's third law of motion. We also learned that
Newton's second law of motion expresses the concept that a force is
equivalent to the rate of change of momentum. Book 1, Chapter 2.1
explained how forces can do work, as the means by which energy is
transferred. So, does the kinetic energy change in a collision?
m = 300kg
u = 5mst
m = 300 kg
u = 1ms
after
m, = 300 kg
V = 2 ms
m = 300 kg
V = 4ms
fig A Damaging a car uses energy, so what can we say about the conservation
of kinetic energy in a car crash?
fig C The fun of inelastic collisions.
Elastic collisions
In a collision between one snooker ball and another, often the
first one stops dead and the second then moves away from the
collision. As both snooker balls have the same mass, the principle
of conservation of momentum tells us that the velocity of the
second ball must be identical to the initial velocity of the first.
This means that the kinetic energy of this system of two balls
before and after the collision must be the same. A collision in
which kinetic energy is conserved is called an elastic collision.
In general, these are rare. A Newton's cradle is an example that is
nearly perfectly elastic (a tiny amount of energy is lost as sound).
A collision caused by non-contact forces, such as alpha particles
being scattered by a nucleus (see Section 10.1.1), is perfectly
elastic.
If you calculate the total momentum before and after the collision
in fig C, you will see that it is conserved. However, what happens
to the kinetic energy?
Before collision:
Ex1 = 1 m u 2 = < < (300) x 12 = 150J
Ex2 = 3 m,uz? = = x (300) * 52 = 3750 J
Total kinetic energy = 3900 J
After collision:
Ex1 = m, v,2 = * (300) X 42 = 2400J
E2=5 m2v2 = x (300) X 22 = 600J
Total kinetic energy = 3000 J
Loss in kinetic energy = 900 J. This is an inelastic collision.
This 'lost' energy will have been transferred into heat and sound
energy
GGGG
Learning tip
Remember that the idea of energy conservation, when considered in
order to decide whether a collision is elastic or inelastic, only relates to
the kinetic energy. Total energy in all forms must always be conserved.
fig B Newton's cradle maintains kinetic energy, as well as conserving
momentum in its collisions.
10
What have I studied before?
• How to add forces as vectors
How to resolve vectors
• Newton's laws of motion
• How to calculate kinetic energy
Conservation of energy
How to calculate the momentum of an object
Conservation of linear momentum in collisions
What will I study later?
How electrical and magnetic fields affect the
momentum of charged particles
How the momentum affects the size of a circle in
which a charged particle is trapped by a magnetic
field
The de Broglie wavelength for a particle and its
connection with the momentum of the particle
Large-angle alpha particle scattering indicating
the structure of the atom, with the scattering
dependent on momentum conservation
How conservation of momentum affects the
creation and detection of new particles
How ideas of momentum conservation in gas-
particle collisions lead to equations for use in the
kinetic theory of gases
What will I study in this chapter?
The impulse equation and its connection with
Newton's second law of motion
The relationship between the force on an object
and its change in momentum
Conservation of linear momentum in two
dimensions
• How to analyse collisions in 2D
The difference between an elastic and an inelastic
collision
The equation for the kinetic energy of a
non-relativistic particle, in terms of its momentum
Exam-style questions
6.1
(d) The student tests the result of the first experiment by firing
a pellet into a pendulum with a bob made of modelling
clay. They calculate the energy transferred.
string
(a) The maximum energy of a nitrogen atom was found to be
1.2 MeV.
Show that the maximum velocity of the atom is about
4 x 106ms-1.
mass of nitrogen atom = 14u, where u = 1.66 x 10-27 kg [3]
(b) The mass of a neutron is Nu (where N is the relative mass
of the neutron) and its initial velocity is x. The nitrogen
atom, mass 14u, is initially stationary and is then knocked
out of the target with a velocity, y, by a collision with a
neutron.
-modelling clay
The student's data and calculations are shown:
Data:
mass of pellet = 0.84g
mass of pendulum and pellet = 71.6 g
change in vertical height of pendulum = 22.6 cm
o**
neutron
stationary
nitrogen atom
[3]
Calculations:
change in gravitational potential energy of pendulum
and pellet
= 71.6 x 10-kg x 9.81 Nkg 1 x 0.226 m = 0.16J
therefore kinetic energy of pendulum and pellet immediately
after collision = 0.16 J
therefore kinetic energy of pellet immediately before collision
= 0.16 J
therefore speed of pellet before collision = 19.5 ms!
(i) Show that the velocity, z, of the neutron after the
collision can be written as
Nx - 14y
Z=-
N
(ii) The collision between this neutron and the nitrogen
atom is elastic. What is meant by an elastic
collision?
(iii) Explain why the kinetic energy Ex of the nitrogen
atom is given by
Nulx - z^)
[1]
Ek =
2
There are no mathematical errors but the student's answer
for the speed is too small.
Explain which of the statements in the calculations are
correct and which are not.
[Total: 16]
(c) The two equations in (b) can be combined and z can be
eliminated to give
2Nx
YEN + 14
6 James Chadwick is credited with discovering the neutron in
1932.
Berylliurn was bombarded with alpha particles, knocking
neutrons out of the beryllium atoms. Chadwick placed various
targets between the beryllium and a detector Hydrogen and
nitrogen atoms were knocked out of the targets by the neutrons
and the kinetic energies of these atoms were measured by
the detector
(i) The maximum velocity of hydrogen atoms knocked
out by neutrons in the same experiment was
3.0 x 10 ms. The mass of a hydrogen atom is 1u.
Show that the relative mass N of the neutron is 1. [3]
(ii) This equation can not be applied to all collisions in
this experiment. Explain why.
[Total: 13]
Further momentum
6.7
Collision vectors
A spacecraft is moving through empty space at 8ms-l. A meteoroid, travelling at 15ms-l, comes
from behind and at an angle of 45° to the line of movement of the rocket, crashes into the rocket
and becomes embedded in it. The rocket has a mass of 350 kg and the meteorite mass is 20 kg.
Calculate the velocity of the rocket after the collision.
rocket
8ms-i
15 ms
meteoroid
fig B Acollision in two dimensions.
Before collision:
Parallel to rocket motion:
Vmeteorite = 15 cos 45º = 10.6 ms-1
Preteorite = 20 x 10.6 = 212 kg ms-1
procket = 350 x 8 = 2800 kg ms-1
Paralla = 2800 + 212 = 3012 kgms-1
Perpendicular to rocket motion:
V meteorite = 15 sin 45º = 10.6ms-1
Poneteorite = 20 X 10.6 = 212 kg ms-1
Procket = 350 x 0 = 0
Perpendicular = 0 + 212 = 212 kg ms-1
After collision:
Vector sum of momenta (fig C):
Pperpendicular = 212 kgms
-
-
-
-
-
-
—
—
—
—
—
—
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Protal
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Parallel = 3012 kgms
fig C Vector sum of total momenta in two dimensions.
Protal = (30122 + 2122) = 3019 kgms?
Ptotal _ 3019
m = 8.16 ms1
(mracket + m.meteorite) (350 + 20)
Angle of momentum (i.e. direction of velocity) after collision:
4 = tan-(2012) = 40
\3012
So, the spacecraft with embedded meteorite carries on at 8.16ms-lat an angle of 4.0° off the
original direction of motion.
13
6.1
2
Deep space collision
The momentum of the combined object after the impactor
embeds in the asteroid is the vector sum of the two initial
momenta, which are at right angles to each other.
After collision:
Pafter = (past? + Pimp) = /((7.69 1014)2 + (2.4 x 10792)
= 7.69 x 104kgms!
Pafter 7.69 x 1014
er Motal (6.1 x 1010 + 4 x 10%)
= 12.6 kms (3 significant figures)
There is no significant change in the magnitude of the asteroid's
velocity - what about its direction?
Angle of momentum after:
a = tan-1 / 2.4 x 107 )
-) = 1.79 x 10-60
(7.69 x 1014)
Although less than two microdegrees sounds like an insignificantly
small angle, this would represent a change in position of nearly
30 km as Apophis crosses the Earth's orbit from one side of the
Sun to the other. This might be just enough to avert a collision
with Earth that would have a hundred times more energy than all
the explosives used in the Second World War.
Investigation
Investigating 2D collisions
fig D The comet Tempel 1 was hit by NASAs Deep Impact probe.
On 4 July 2005, NASA's Deep Impact mission succeeded in
crashing a spacecraft into a comet called Tempel 1 (fig D). For
that mission, the impactor spacecraft had a mass of 370 kg
compared with the comet's mass of 7.2 x 1013 kg, so there would
have been an insignificant change in the comet's trajectory. Deep
Impact was purely intended to study the comet's composition.
However, there is an asteroid named Apophis which has a small
chance of colliding with Earth in 2035, 2036, or maybe 2037, and
there have been some calls for a mission to crash a spacecraft into
Apophis in order to deviate it out of harm's way. The mass of this
asteroid is 6.1 x 1010kg and it is travelling at 12.6 kms-1. It has
been claimed that a collision by a 4000 kg impactor craft travelling
at 6 kms-1 could alter the path of this asteroid enough to ensure
it would not hit Earth. If this impactor collided with Apophis at
right angles, we can calculate the change in angle of the asteroid
(fig E).
before
after
u = 6.0 kms-i
vkms-1
LLLLLLLL
u
= 12.6 kms +
fig E Could we hit an asteroid hard enough to save Earth from Asteroid Impact
Hazards?
Before collision:
pt = m = 6.1 x 1010 X 12.6 x 103 = 7.69 x 1014 kg ms-
P = mimum = 4 x 103 X 6 X 10% = 2.4 x 107kg ms-1
fig G Video analysis of collisions in 2D.
You can investigate two-dimensional collisions in the school
laboratory. We saw in Book 1, Section 2.1.2 that by analysing video
footage of an object's movement, frame by frame, we can calculate
any changes in velocity. With measurement scales in two dimensions,
the components of velocity in each dimension can be isolated. Thus,
separate calculations can be made in each dimension, in order to
verify the conservation of momentum in 2D. Make sure you have a
good understanding of this practical as your understanding of the
experimental method may be assessed in your examinations.
total momentum p after impact
Pite = 2.4 x 10
-
= 7.69 X 104kgms-
P
fig F The vector sum of momentum components after asteroid impact.
14
6.1
More collisions
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• apply the conservation of linear momentum to situations in
two dimensions
analyse collisions in two dimensions
calculate impulses and changes in momentum
Impulse
The product of a force applied for a certain time (Fx Al) is known
as the impulse, and this is equal to the change in momentum:
impulse (Ns) = force (N) x time (s)
= change in momentum (kgms-1)
impulse = Fx Ar= Ap
To stop something moving, we need to remove all of its
momentum. This idea allows us to calculate the impulse needed
to stop an object moving. If we know how long a force is applied,
we could work out the size of that force.
WORKED EXAMPLE
We have so far only considered the conservation of linear
momentum in one-dimensional collisions, where all objects move
forwards and/or backwards along the same straight line. This is
an unusual situation, and we need to be able to work with more
complex movements. Helpfully, momentumn is conserved in each
dimension separately. So, we resolve vector movements entering
a collision into components in each dimension and then calculate
following the conservation of momentum in each dimension.
After this, we can recombine component vectors to give us an
overall vector after a collision. A real world example, as in fig A,
will illustrate this best.
What is the impulse needed to accelerate a 1000 kg car from rest to
25 ms-?
p = mxv
At the start, the car is at rest, so has no momentum. Therefore the
change in momentum will equal its final momentum:
Ap = 1000 x 25
impulse = F x At = Ap
I = 25000 kgms
WP
Investigation
Investigating impulse
motion sensor
00
If the car needed to stop in 3.8 seconds, what force would the
brakes need to apply?
At the end, the car is at rest, so has no momenturn. Therefore the
change in momentum will equal its initial momentum:
Ft = mav
mAv = 25 000 kg ms -1
laptop
datalogger
F-MÁV
25000
F3.8
F = 6600 N to 2 significant figures
fig A Measuring how impulse changes the momentum of a trolley
In Book 1, Section 2.3.1 we saw how you can investigate the change
in momentum over time for a trolley that is subject to a constant
accelerating force. Using the same apparatus, you could again record
how different forces acting over different time periods cause the
trolley to accelerate to different velocities. From these results, you
can calculate the impulse applied in each case. As I = FAt = Ap =
Amv, a graph of impulse on the y-axis against change in velocity on
the x-axis should give a straight best fit line through the origin. This
straight line verifies the impulse equation, and the gradient of it will
give the mass of the accelerating trolley and weights. Make sure you
have a good understanding of this practical as your understanding of
the experimental method may be assessed in your examinations.
12
6.1
Exam-style questions
(Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
[2]
5 (a) Explain what is meant by the principle of conservation
of momentum
(b) The picture shows a toy car initially at rest with a piece
of modelling clay attached to it.
1 An inelastic collision:
A conserves momentum but not kinetic energy
B conserves momentum and kinetic energy
C need not conserve energy
D need not conserve momentum.
[1]
[Total: 1]
2 A tennis ball travelling with the momentum of 4.2 kgms-' is hit
by a tennis racquet. The force of 56 N from the racquet causes
the tennis ball to travel back in the opposite direction with
5.8 kg ms-1. How long is the ball in contact with the racquet?
A 0.029s
B 0.10s
C 0.18s
D5.6s
[Total: 1]
[1]
[1]
A student carries out an experiment to find the speed of a
pellet fired from an air rifle. The pellet is fired horizontally
into the modelling clay. The pellet remains in the modelling
clay as the car moves forward. The motion of the car is
filmed for analysis.
The car travels a distance of 69 cm before coming to rest
after a time of 1.3 s.
(i) Show that the speed of the car immediately after
being struck by the pellet was about 1 ms!
(ii) State an assumption you made in order to apply the
equation you used.
(iii) Show that the speed of the pellet just before it collides
with the car is about 120ms!
mass of car and modelling clay = 97.31 g
mass of pellet = 0.84 g
(c) The modelling clay is removed and is replaced by a metal
plate of the same mass. The metal plate is fixed to the back
of the car. The experiment is repeated but this time the
pellet bounces backwards.
*(i) Explain why the speed of the toy car will now be
greater than in the original experiment.
(ii) The film of this experiment shows that the pellet
bounces back at an angle of 72° to the horizontal.
Explain why the car would move even faster if the
pellet bounced directly backwards at the same
speed.
[3]
3 In order to calculate the kinetic energy of a non-relativistic
particle, we would need to know its:
A mass only
B mass and momentum
C acceleration and momentum
D velocity and acceleration.
[1]
[Total: 1]
[3]
4 A spacecraft called Deep Space 1, mass 486 kg, uses an
'ion-drive engine. This type of engine is designed to be used
in deep space.
The following statement appeared in a website.
The ion propulsion system on Deep Space 1 expels 0.13 kg
of xenon propellant each day. The xenon ions are expelled
from the spacecraft at a speed of 30 kms-l. The speed of
the spacecraft is predicted to initially increase by about
8ms' each day.
Use a calculation to comment on the prediction made in this
statement.
[Total: 4]
18
Thinking Bigger
6.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the two plot summaries,
1. The extracts were written by members of the public.
a. Discuss the tone, level of vocabulary and level of scientific detail that has been used -
who is the intended audience?
b. Discuss any differences in narrative approach between the two movies that are
evident from the information given in each plot summary.
2. Explain which of the two movies sounds the most appealing to you as a viewer, including
what aspects of the movie appeal most to you, based solely on the plot summaries
above.
000
Consider whether the
storytelling in the movies
focuses on technology and
scientific points, human
relationships, everyday
events or high stakes plot
points, everyday people or
high level leaders.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
Think about what would
determine the motion of
the broken pieces after
the explosion – consider
conservation of momentum.
3. a. Explain the physics behind the plan in Armageddon to ensure the main rock does not
collide with Earth.
b. In Armaggedon, explain the existence of the dead line' after which parts of the comet
would still hit the Earth even if it were broken up by the explosion.
4. Texas is roughly 1000 km across. Armageddon's comet was depicted with an asteroid-like
structure of iron and rock. The overall density of such asteroids is about 2000 kg m-3.
a. Calculate the depth that the nuclear bomb is to be placed in this comet as a
percentage of its size. Comment on the plan to break up the comet this way. (1 foot =
30 cm)
b. Estimate the volume of the comet in Armageddon, and in this way calculate your
estimate for the comet's mass.
c. The movie claims this comet is travelling at 10 000 m sl and the bomb must split the
comet no less than four hours before impact. The Earth's radius is 6400 km. Calculate the
force that the nuclear explosion, lasting for 2 seconds, would need to apply to send the
two parts off course enough to save the Earth.
5. An Extinction Level Event (Deep Impact plot summary) is one in which a significant
quantity and diversity of the life on Earth becomes extinct. There have been several such
events in history. Comets are typically tens of kilometres in diameter. Whilst a comet
impact of this size would cause great destruction locally, it could not directly kill a
significant amount of the life on Earth. Do some research and explain how a comet
impact could lead to an Extinction Level Event
UUUUUUUUUUUU
Activity
Write a plot summary for a movie you have seen which has a significant scientific or technological
element to the plot or setting. Use the extracts to guide you in terms of the structure and length of your
own summary.
It is important to make
sure that you include all
aspects of the movie,
not just the plot, the
characters, or the setting.
At the same time, make
sure that your writing is
as concise as possible
>
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.
1
1 3.1
Further momentum
6.7
before
after
WP
Investigation
Investigating elastic and inelastic collisions
WP)
umystery = 3.0 X 10'ms-
Vrystery = -1.09 % 10% ms1
u utrc = 0 ms
V neutro = 3.4 X 10"ms!
fig D Crash testing the elasticity of collisions.
You can investigate elastic and inelastic collisions in the school
laboratory. If you cause head-on collisions, and record the mass and
velocity of each trolley before and after the collisions, you then
calculate the momentum at each stage. This should be conserved. You
can also then calculate kinetic energy before and after the collisions.
Real cars are designed to absorb as much kinetic energy as possible
when they crash. This reduces the energy available to cause injury to
the passengers. What is the best design on your experimental trolleys
for a crumple zone to fulfil this idea of kinetic energy absorption?
fig E Discovering mystery particles from their momentum and collisions.
Before collision:
Pmystery = m mystery * 3 * 107 = Ptotal before (p. = zero)
After collision:
Ptotal after = (mmystery * Vimystery) + (m. X V.)
= (m. mystery X -1.09 x 10>) + (1.67 x 10-27 x 3.4 x 106)
Protal before = m ystery X 3 X 107
Thus:
(m. mystery X -1.09 x 10") + (1.67 x 10-27 x 3.4 x 106)
= mystery X 3 X 107
(1.67 x 10-27 x 3.4 x 10) = (
m ystery x 3 x 10") –
(minystery X -1.09 x 10)
5.678 x 10-21 = (m mystery X 30 001 090)
So:
5.678 x 10-21
Mystery – 30001 090
Particle momentum
We know that the formula for calculating kinetic energy is
Ex = 1 mv2 and that the formula for momentum is p= mv. By
combining these we can get an equation that gives kinetic energy
in terms of the momentum and mass.
Ex = mv2 and v=p
= 1.89 x 10-22 kg
This is approximately 207 times the mass of an electron, and so
this can be identified as a particle called a muon, which is known
to have this mass.
Questions
This formula is particularly useful for dealing with the kinetic
energy of subatomic particles travelling at non-relativistic speeds
- that is, much slower than the speed of light.
| An alpha particle consists of two protons and two neutrons.
Calculate the kinetic energy of an alpha particle which has a
momentum of 1.08 x 10-19 kgms1:
(a) in joules
(b) in electron volts
(c) in MeV.
(mass of neutron = mass of proton = 1.67 x 10-27 kg)
2 Abowling ball travelling at 5 ms strikes the only standing pin
straight on. The pin flies backward at 7 msl. Calculate:
(a) the velocity of the bowling ball after the collision
(b) the loss of kinetic energy in this collision.
(mass of bowling ball = 6.35 kg: mass of pin = 1 kg)
Particle collisions
In experiments to determine the nature of fundamental particles,
physicists detect the movements of many unknown particles. The
Large Hadron Collider experiment at CERN, underground near
Geneva in Switzerland, produces 600 million particle interactions in
its detector every second. The conservation of momentum allows
the mass of these particles to be calculated, which helps towards
their identification. This can be done by colliding the particles
produced in the experiment with known particles in the detector.
For example, if the detector registers an elastic collision with one
of its neutrons, changing the neutron's velocity from stationary to
3.4 x 106ms- in a head-on collision with an unknown particle,
which was initially moving at 10% of the speed of light, and leaves
the collision in the opposite direction at 1.09 x 10ms-l, what
is the mass of the mystery particle? The mass of a neutron is
1.67 x 10-27 kg.
In a particle collision experiment, a mystery particle was detected
to have collided with a stationary neutron and set the neutron into
motion with a velocity of 1.5 x 107ms-1. If the mystery particle
arrived at a velocity of 1% of the speed of light, and recoiled after
collision with a velocity of 7.5 x 105 m s' in the opposite direction,
calculate the mass of the mystery particle, and so identify it.
Kev definitions
An elastic collision is a collision in which total kinetic energy is conserved.
An inelastic collision is a collision in which total kinetic energy is not
conserved.
