TOPIC 6
Further mechanics
CHAPTER
16.2
Circular motion
Introduction
What is it that makes the swing carousel an exhilarating fairground ride? How do the engineers that build it have
WP) confidence that it will be safe in operation? The motion of objects in circles is very common in everyday life. We see
the Moon orbiting the Earth, and the Earth orbiting the Sun, whilst the Earth itself is making us rotate in a circle every
day. The mathematics of the forces governing this motion are essentially simple, but the application to a particular real-life
situation, like the amount of tension in the chains of the swing carousel pictured here, can often leave people confused.
In this chapter, we will learn how simple trigonometry and basic mechanics can generate the mathematics we need to be able
to analyse and predict the circular motions of many things, from subatomic particles being accelerated in the Large Hadron
Collider, to the routing of a spacecraft travelling to Mars. Indeed, very simple circular motion calculations on entire galaxies led
scientists to the realisation that there must be as-yet-undetected dark matter throughout the Universe.
All the maths you need
• Use of trigonometric functions (e.g. in deriving the equations for centripetal acceleration)
• Use of an appropriate number of significant figures (e.g. calculating angular velocities of planets)
• Use of small angle approximations (e.g. in deriving the equations for centripetal acceleration)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. finding the time period of orbits from a known angular velocity)
• Translating information between numerical and graphical forms (e.g. finding the square of the angular velocity to plot a graph)
• Determining the slope of a linear graph (e.g. finding the gradient of the line in a centripetal force experiment analysis)
20
NERAL ADM
GENERAL ADMISSION
TICKET WINDOWS 610
What have I studied before?
Speed and acceleration
How to add vectors
How to resolve vectors
Newton's laws of motion
The radian
Tension forces
What will I study later?
• The circular motion of charged particles in
magnetic fields
Particle accelerators
Particle detectors
The Large Hadron Collider
Gravitational fields and orbital motion
Simple harmonic motion
What will I study in this chapter?
How to use both radians and degrees in angle
measurements
The concept of angular velocity, and how to
calculate it
Centripetal acceleration and how to derive its
equations
The need for a centripetal force to enable circular
motion
Calculations of centripetal force
PLASTRE
ENSURE
6.2
Circular motion basics
travels around the circumference (also in metres) would be equal
to the angle swept out in radians.
length of arc
angle (in radians) = radio of are
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
express angular displacement in radians and in degrees, and
convert between these units
define angular velocity, and make calculations using it
define centripetal acceleration, and derive and use the
equations for it
So, for a complete circle, in which the circumference is equal to
2tr, the angle swept out would be:
0 = 277 = 2 radians
This means that the angle will be 1 radian (rad) if the distance
moved around the circle is the same as the radius; just over of
the distance around the circumference.
In our study of wave phase in Book 1, Section 5.2.1, we learned
how angles can be measured in radians as well as in degrees, and
how to convert between these two units. In this section, we will see
how that can be taken further to measure movements around a circle.
1/2
3
/4
1/4
Going round in circles
For an object moving in a circle, we often need to measure where it
is around that circle. For example, to consider the relative positions
of planets in their orbits at a particular moment, we need to be able
to state where each one is (ignoring, for the sake of this example,
the fact that planetary orbits are not perfect circles!).
Angles measured in degrees are used extensively in navigation in
order to locate places and discuss the difference between moving
from one starting point to two possible destinations. This is
measuring angular displacement on the surface of the Earth. Each
degree is subdivided into 60 minutes and each of those minutes
into 60 seconds
-
-
-
-
/
-----
51/4
7.1/4
fig B Measuring angles in radians.
Angular displacement is the vector measurement of the angle
through which something has moved. The standard convention
is that anticlockwise rotation is a positive number and clockwise
rotation is a negative number.
Angle in radians
Angle in degrees
45
77/4
7/2
37/4
90
T
fig A Measuring angles in degrees.
When we are measuring rotation, we often use the alternative
unit to measure angles - the radian. This is defined by the nature
of a circle itself. Imagine an object moves around part of the
circumference of a circle. The angle through which it moves,
measured in radians, is defined as the distance it travels, divided
by its distance from the centre of the circle (the radius). If the
radius of the circle were one metre, then the distance the object
135
180
225
270
57/4
37/2
77/4
27
table A Angles measured in degrees and radians.
315
360
6.2
The mathematical formula for the centripetal force on an object moving in a circle can
be found from Newton's second law, and the equation we already have for the centripetal
acceleration:
F= ma and a=
mass x (velocity)
centripetal force =
radius
Noting that v= rw, there is an alternative equation for centripetal force in terms of angular
velocity:
F=mp2 = m(rwy?
F=mrw2
The resultant centripetal force needed will be larger if:
the rotating object has more mass
• the object rotates faster
• the object is further away from the centre of the circle.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Estimate the centripetal force on an astronaut in the astronaut training centrifuge (see fig B) if his
capsule rotated once every 2 seconds.
Estimate of radius of revolution: r =6m.
Estimate of astronaut's mass. m = 80 kg.
velocity, v= = 2516) – 18.8 ms-
centripetal force, F=!
This is about 6 times his weight.
If the operator of the centrifuge were to increase its rate of rotation to once every second, what
would the astronaut's angular velocity, centripetal force and acceleration now be?
angular velocity, w = 2nf = 6.28 rad s-1
centripetal force, F = mrw2 = (80) (6) (6.28)2 = 18 900 N
centripetal acceleration, a = r2 = (6) (6.28)2 = 237 ms2
This is about 24 times the acceleration due to gravity and would most likely be fatal if maintained
for more than a few seconds.
v
(80) (18.8) - 4700N
Learning tip
Circular motion equations summary:
angular displacement, 0 =
angular velocity, w = 2nf = 241 =
centripetal acceleration, a = r2 =
centripetal force, F = mrw2 = mv2
26
6.2
2
Centripetal force
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain that a centripetal force is required to produce and maintain circular motion
use the equations for centripetal force
In Section 6.2.1 we saw how an object moving in a circle must be constantly accelerating towards
the centre of the circle in order to maintain its motion around the circle.
Why circular motion?
When a hammer thrower whirls an athletics hammer around in a circle, the hammer has an angular
velocity. Yet when the thrower lets the hammer go, it will fly off, following a straight line which is the
direction in which it was moving at the instant of release. This direction is always along the edge of
the circle (a tangent) at the point when it was released.
Learning tip
There is no special centripetal
force, any resultant force that
makes an object move in a
circle is labelled as the
centripetal force for that object
and circle. For example, a
satellite will move in a circular
orbit around the Earth because
its weight acts towards the
centre of the Earth. The weight
is the only force acting, so
could be referred to as the
centripetal force.
fig A The instantaneous velocity of an object moving in a circle is tangential to the circle. When there is no resultant
force, velocity will be constant, so it moves in a straight line.
As the hammer is whirled at a constant speed, the magnitude of the velocity is always the same.
However, the direction of the velocity is constantly changing. This means that the vector of velocity
is constantly changing, and a change in velocity is an acceleration. Newton's first law tells us that
acceleration will only happen if there is a resultant force. The hammer is constantly being pulled
towards the centre of the circle. In this example, the force providing this pull is the tension in the
string (or chain). For any object moving in a circle, there must be a resultant force to cause this
acceleration, and it is called the centripetal force.
Centripetal force
fig B Astronauts are subject to extreme acceleration forces. These forces are simulated in training by the centripetal
force in a giant centrifuge.
Exam-style questions
6.2
space cycle
MAMMA
cage
A
(a) Calculate the time taken for each cabin to make one
complete revolution.
(b) Calculate the centripetal force acting on each cabin.
Mass of cabin = 9.7 x 10 kg
[2]
(c) (i) The diagram shows just the circle and the cabins.
Draw arrows to show the direction of the centripetal
force acting on a person in a cabin when the person is
at each of positions A, B and C.
ODAQO
Wwwwwwwwww
MANA
MMA
WASHIM
[1]
exercise bike
drawn to scale
(a) Calculate the angular velocity, in rad s I, corresponding to
20 revolutions per minute.
[2]
(b) Use the diagram to estimate the radius of the path followed
by the cage's platform and in this way calculate the
platform's acceleration.
[Total: 5]
[3]
6 The London Eye consists of a large vertical circle with
32 equally spaced passenger cabins attached to it. The wheel
rotates so that each cabin has a constant speed of 0.26 ms-1
and moves around a circle of radius 61 m.
*(ii) As the person in a cabin moves around the circle,
the normal contact force between the person and the
cabin varies.
State the position at which this force will be a
maximum and the position at which it will be a
minimum. Explain your answers.
[Total: 9]
[4]
7 Describe an experiment you could carry out in a school
laboratory to verify the equation for the centripetal force:
Include details of the measurements to be made, and the
precautions that would minimise experimental errors. Also
include explanations of the analysis of the experimental results
that would confirm the verification.
[6]
[Total: 6]
Circular motion
6.2
(sometimes called the 'instantaneous velocity'). We know that
v=, and from the definition of the angle in radians 0 = , so that
s=r8.
Thus: v=r8
v=rw
Did you know?
Military angles
The British Army uses a system for angle measurement in which a
complete circle is divided into 6400 'mils'. This is an abbreviation for
milliradian. They have rounded the numbers for easy use though, as
strictly speaking there should be 6283 milliradians in a complete
circle. The idea is that at 1 kilometre distance, an angle of 1 mil
would represent a distance of 1 metre. So, when aiming artillery fire,
a horizontal adjustment of 1 mil in angle of fire should move to a
target 1 metre sideways for every kilometre distance away.
s = 10
:: for 1 mil angle at 1 km distance:
s = 1000 < 0.001 = 1 m
WORKED EXAMPLE
In fig D we can see a geostationary satellite orbiting the Earth.
What is its angular velocity?
In order to find the angular velocity, remember that it completes an
orbit at the same rate as the Earth revolves, so one full circle every
24 hours
€
€
Z72T
(24 x 60 x 60) 86400
w = 7.27 x 10-5 rad s-1
90-3-08
-
--
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
fig C Measuring angles in mils.
Angular velocity
An object moving in a circle sweeps out a certain angle in a
certain time, depending upon how fast it is moving. The rate at
which the angular displacement changes is called the angular
velocity, w. So, angular velocity is measured in rad s-, and is
defined mathematically by:
fig D How quickly does a satellite rotate through a certain angle?
If the radius of the Earth is 6400 km and the satellite in fig D is in
orbit 35 600 km above the Earth's surface, what is the velocity of
the satellite?
From before, w = 7.27 x 10-5 rads-1
V=rw = (6400 + 35 600) > 103 * 7.27 x 10-5
v=3050 m 5-1
If the object completes a full circle (27 radians) in a time period,
T, then the angular velocity is given by:
21
.:
T=27
The frequency of rotation is the reciprocal of the time period.
f=
iw=27f
Centripetal acceleration
Velocity is a vector, and so it is correctly described by quoting
both its magnitude and direction. An acceleration can change
either of these, or both. An object moving in a circle may travel
at a constant speed (and a constant angular velocity) but the
direction it is moving in must constantly change. This means it
is constantly accelerating. As this acceleration represents the
changes in direction around the circle, it is called the centripetal
acceleration, a. In order to determine how to calculate the
centripetal acceleration, we must consider how quickly the
direction, and therefore the velocity, is changing.
Instantaneous velocity
Rather than thinking about the angular movement, let us
consider the actual velocity through space of the moving object
Thinking Bigger
6.2
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing on the webpage.
1. The extract above consists of information from an American space architect. Consider
the extract and comment on the type of writing that is used in each case. Try and answer
the following questions.
a. Discuss the tone and level of vocabulary included in the article - who is the intended
audience?
b. Discuss the level of scientific detail included in the article, particularly considering
the intended audience.
c. Compare the webpage of the extract with this more recent website
http://spacearchitect.org/ considering style and presentation, in addition to content.
The main basis for the
website is a calculator
that calculates the
artificial gravity for various
different sizes and speeds
of rotation. You may find it
helpful to visit the website
to view it and its list of
references.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
uvwUUU
Considering the equations
for centripetal acceleration,
remember that the tangential
velocity is dependent on
radius.
2. a. Explain the author's suggestion that 'artificial gravity ... is proportional to radius'.
b. What would a 'gravity gradient' be? Explain how it would come about and why it
would be minimised by maximising the radius.
3. a. Convert the angular velocity in Gilruth's data into SI units.
b. Calculate the centripetal force on an 82 kg astronaut using Gilruth's data.
c. If this astronaut tried to walk by providing a tangential force of 350 N, calculate the
moment caused by his foot, acting on the floor about the spacecraft's central axis.
4. Do some research on the Coriolis force effect, and use your research to explain the final
sentence in the section on angular velocity.
5. Explain how a spaceship, in space, could be made to start rotating.
Twory
You will need to consider
how to highlight where
and how measurements
would be made.
Activity
Imagine that Mr Hall, the space architect, has been invited to give a talk at your school about artificial
gravity. You have been asked to prepare some demonstrations to illustrate how the data in the experiments
referenced above could have been measured. Prepare instructions for two demonstrations you will do.
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
29
6.2 Exam-style questions
[Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
[2]
(a) Calculate the average force used to accelerate a fully
loaded train along the horizontal track.
Total mass of fully loaded train = 12 000 kg
(b) Point X is just before the train leaves the horizontal track
and moves into the first bend. Complete the free-body
diagram below to show the two forces acting on a rider in
the train at this point.
137
1 Which of the following is not a correct unit for angular
velocity?
A rad min!
B degrees per minute
Crads
D®-1
[1]
[Total: 1]
2 Considering the centripetal force to make a car drive around a
roundabout, it is more likely to skid outwards if:
A it has fewer passengers
B it has worn tyres
C it travels more slowly
D it drives around further from the centre of the
roundabout.
[1]
[Total: 1]
(c) The mass of the rider is m and g is the acceleration of free
fall. Just after point X, the reaction force of the train on the
rider is 4 mg and can be assumed to be vertical.
This is referred to as a g-force of 4g.
Show that the radius of curvature of the track at this point
is about 100 m.
[3]
(d) Show that the speed of the train as it reaches the top of
the vertical tower is about 20 ms. Assume that resistance
forces are negligible.
The height of the vertical tower is 139 m.
[2]
(e) Riders will feel momentarily weightless if the vertical
reaction force becomes zero.
The track is designed so that this happens at point Y.
Calculate the radius of the track at point Y.
[2]
[Total: 12]
3 A particle moves in a circle, completing 14.5 complete
revolutions in one minute. What is its angular velocity?
A 0.24 rad s-1
B 1.52 rad s-1
C 14.5 rad s-1
D 87 rad s-1
[Total: 1]
[1]
4 Kingda Ka was the highest roller coaster in the world in 2007.
A train is initially propelled along a horizontal track by a
hydraulic system. It reaches a speed of 57 ms- from rest in
3.5 s. It then climbs a vertical tower before falling back towards
the ground
5 Astronauts can be weakened by the long-term effects of
microgravity. To keep in shape it has been suggested that they
can do some exercise using a Space Cycle: a horizontal beam
from which an exercise bike and a cage are suspended. One
astronaut sits on the exercise bike and pedals, which causes the
whole Space Cycle to rotate around a pole. Another astronaut
standing in the cage experiences artificial gravity. When rotated
at 20 revolutions per minute, this is of similar strength to the
gravitational field on Earth.
vertical tower -
direction of train
6.2
vcoso
vo
vsino
B
vcoso
0
The centripetal acceleration in this case is just the horizontal
acceleration, as we considered the object in a position along
a horizontal radius. Following a similar derivation at any point
around the circle will always have identical components of
velocity that are perpendicular to the radius on either side of
the point being considered. Thus, the centripetal acceleration is
always directed towards the centre of the circle.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the centripetal acceleration of the satellite in fig D?
(3050)
(6400 + 35 600) 103
a = 0.22 ms-2
or:
a = r2 = (6400 + 35600) * 10 (7.27 x 10-572
a = 0.22 ms 2
vsino
a=7
fig E Vector components of velocity leads us to the centripetal acceleration
equation.
At the arbitrary positions of the rotating object, A and, at a time t
later, B, we consider the components of the object's velocity, in the
x and y directions.
As A and B are equal distances above and below point C, the
vertical velocity component, vy, is the same in both cases:
V = vcoso
So the vertical acceleration is zero:
4, = 0
Questions
Convert:
(a) 47 radians into degrees
(b) 36° into radians.
What is the angular velocity of an athletics hammer if the athlete
spins at a rate of three revolutions per second?
Horizontally, the magnitude of the velocity is equal at both points,
but in opposite directions:
at A: V = vsin
at B: V = -v sin
So, the acceleration is just the horizontal acceleration, calculated
as change in velocity divided by time:
2v sino
Vinyl records are played at one of three speeds. Calculate the
angular velocity of each:
(a) (1) 33 revolutions per minute
(ii) 45 revolutions per minute
(iii) 78 revolutions per minute.
(b) Vinyl records played at the speeds in part (a) (i) are usually
12 inches (or 30 cm) in diameter. What would be the centripetal
acceleration of a point on the outside circumference of a record
such as this?
From the definition of angular velocity above:
V="?
Here, the angle moved in time t is labelled as 20, so:
t=r20
A man standing on the Equator will be moving due to the rotation
of the Earth
(a) What is his angular velocity?
(b) What is his instantaneous velocity?
(c) What is his centripetal acceleration?
v2v sin 0 v2 sin 0
i = r2010
This must be true for all values of 0, and as we want to find the
instantaneous acceleration at any point on the circumference, we
must consider the general answer as we reduce o to zero. In the
limit, as 8 tends to zero:
5 What is the percentage error in the British Army measurement
system that uses 6400 mils for a complete circle?
sin
= 1
2
: centripetal acceleration a =
From the definition of the instantaneous velocity above:
v=rw
Key definitions
A radian is a unit of angle measurement, equivalent to 57.3 degrees.
Angular displacement is the vector measurement of the angle
through which something has moved.
Angular velocity w is the rate at which the angular displacement
changes, unit, radians per second.
Centripetal acceleration, a is the acceleration towards the centre of
a circle that corresponds to the changes in direction to maintain an
object's motion around that circle.
centripetal acceleration a = rw2
Circular motion
6.2
WP
Investigation
Investigating centripetal force
Danas
fig C Verifying the centripetal force equation. Eye protection should be worn during this investigation.
-
rubber
body of
ballpoint-
pen
burg
paper clip
marker
force
fig D Experimental detail for centripetal force experiment.
You can investigate the centripetal force equation by spinning a rubber bung on a string around in a circle.
The tension in the string, which is the centripetal force, will be provided by the hanging masses at the bottom
of the vertical string and thus will be known. Spin the rubber bung around in a circle at a speed that keeps a
paperclip marker in a constant position near the handle. The paperclip marker allows you to maintain a fixed
length of string (radius) which you can measure. You will also need to measure the mass of the rubber bung.
Your partner can then time ten revolutions in order to give you the angular velocity. Take angular velocity
measurements for different forces (different numbers of hanging masses).
F = mrw2
.. we mr
A graph of w2plotted against Fshould give a straight best-fit line. The gradient of this line will be
mr
Questions
A roller coaster has a complete (circular) loop with a radius of 20 m. A 65 kg woman rides the roller coaster
and the car travels once round the loop in 4.5 seconds. What centripetal force does the woman experience?
2 Aman with a mass of 75 kg standing on the Equator is moving because of the rotation of the Earth.
(a) What centripetal force is required to keep him moving in this circle?
(b) How does this compare with his weight?
(c) How would the reaction force with the ground be different if he went to the South Pole? (Assume the
Earth is a perfect sphere.)
Key definition
Centripetal force is the resultant force towards the centre of the circle to maintain an object's circular
motion.
THINKING
BIGGER
ARTIFICIAL GRAVITY
Astronauts on long-term space missions would benefit from the generation of artificial gravity within
their ships. Common designs for this involve rotating the spaceship, but this movement can lead to
motion sickness.
hull pushes on
astronaut to keep
her moving
in a circle
-astronaut
in artificial
gravity
outer hull of
spacecraft
spacecraft
spins around
fig A This is how artificial gravity is generated in a spacecraft.
Artificial gravity, as it is usually conceived, is the inertial reaction to the
centripetal acceleration that acts on a body in circular motion. Artificial-
gravity environments are often characterized in terms of four parameters:
• radius from the centre of rotation (in metres)
angular velocity or 'spin rate' (usually quoted in revolutions
per minute)
• tangential velocity or 'rim speed' (in metres per second)
• centripetal acceleration or 'gravity level' (in multiples of the Earth's
surface gravity).
Comfort criteria
Deliberate architectural design for the unusual conditions of artificial
gravity ought to aid adaptation and improve the habitability of the
environment (Hall).
Here is a summary of five research articles which consider the parameters
leading to rotational discomfort:
Radius Because centripetal acceleration - the nominal artificial gravity
- is directly proportional to radius, inhabitants will experience a head-to-
foot 'gravity gradient'. To minimize the gradient, maximize the radius.
Angular velocity The cross-coupling of normal head rotations with the
habitat rotation can lead to dizziness and motion sickness. To minimize
this cross-coupling, minimize the habitat's angular velocity.
Graybiel conducted a series of experiments in a 15-foot-diameter 'slow
rotation room' and observed:
In brief, at 1.0 rpm even highly susceptible subjects were symptom-
free, or nearly so. At 3.0 rpm subjects experienced symptoms but
were not significantly handicapped. Ar 5.4 rpm, only subjects with
low susceptibility performed well and by the second day were almost
free from symptoms. Ar 10 rpm, however, adaptation presented a
challenging but interesting problem. Even pilots without a history of
air sickness did not fully adapt in a period of twelve days.
On the other hand, Lackner and DiZio found that:
Sensory-motor adaptation to 10 rpm can be achieved relatively easily
and quickly if subjects make the same movement repeatedly. This
repetition allows the nervous system to gauge how the Coriolis forces
generated by movements in a rotating reference frame are deflecting
movement paths and endpoints, and to institute corrective adaptations.
Tangential velocity When people or objects move within a rotating
habitat, they're subjected to Coriolis accelerations that distort the apparent
gravity. For relative motion in the plane of rotation, the ratio of Coriolis
to centripetal acceleration is twice the ratio of the relative velocity to the
habitat's tangential velocity. To minimize this ratio, maximize the habitat's
tangential velocity.
Centripetal acceleration The centripetal acceleration must have some
minimum value to offer any practical advantage over weightlessness. One
common criterion is to provide adequate floor traction. The minimum
required to preserve health remains unknown.
Author
Year Radius m
min.
Hill & Schnitzer 1962 not known
Gilruth
1969 12
Gordon & Gervais 1969 12
Stone
1973 4
Cramer
1985 not known
Angular Tangential Centripetal
Velocity Velocity Acceleration
[rpm] [m/s]
max. min. min. max.
4 6 0 .035 1.0
6 not known 0.3 0.9
0.2 1.0
6 10 0.2 1.0
0.1 1.0
From a webpage to calculate artificial gravity, maintained by Ted Hall: Hall,
Theodore W. (2012). "SpinCalc: An Artificial-Gravity Calculator in JavaScript';
www.artificial-gravity.com/sw/SpinCalc/SpinCalc.htm (as at 24 October 2014).
Where else will I encounter these themes?
YOU ARE
Book
1
6
.1
6.2
HERE
7.2
7.3
8.1
28
