TOPIC 11
Gravitational fields
CHAPTER
11.1 Gravitational fields
Introduction
One of the most obvious and therefore longest investigated scientific phenomena is gravity. Dropping your pen is a
WP clear indication of its presence and effects. As these effects have been studied for so long, we can use them to our
advantage in very precise ways. In November 2014, the European Space Agency landed a probe on the comet
67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. This may not sound remarkable - we have landed probes on the Moon, Mars, other planets
and moons of other planets. However, the size and mass of this comet is such that the gravitational field is so weak that it
would struggle to create a centripetal force of attraction on the probe in order to enable orbiting. The ESA had to ensure that
the lander was travelling at less than one metre per second, and even then the lander bounced significantly.
However, gravity remains one of the least well-understood areas of physics. There are a number of experiments currently
ongoing to try and observe some of the theoretical explanations of how gravity works on a fundamental level. As yet, none
have been conclusive, but as their sensitivity improves, scientists hope that we will be able to gather enough experimental
evidence to confirm how gravity works. Gravity waves, quantum gravity and so-called strong gravity are current areas of
interest to cutting-edge physicists.
All the maths you need
• Solving algebraic equations (e.g.finding a satellite's orbital height above the surface of the Earth)
• Changing the subject of a non-linear equation (e.g. finding the separation of objects using Newton's universal law of
gravitation)
• Sketching and interpreting relationships shown graphically (e.g. comparing sketch graphs of gravitational field strength
and potential)
• Distinguishing between average and instantaneous rates of change (e.g. gravitational field strength as the rate of change
of potential with distance)
162
What have I studied before?
• Gravitational potential energy
• Weight and gravity
• Newton's laws of motion
. Coulomb's law
- Electric fields and electric potential
Circular motion
What will I study later?
• How gravity leads to the development of stars
• The production of elements in stellar nuclear
fusion
The gravitational field strength at the surface of a
black hole
The influence of gravity on the development of
galaxies and the Universe as a whole
Dark matter and its gravitational effects
Gravitational lensing as evidence for black holes
What will I study in this chapter?
How gravitational forces follow an inverse square
relationship
What is meant by a gravitational field
How to calculate the strength of gravitational
fields
Gravitational potential
• Comparisons of electric and gravitational fields
163
11.1
Gravitational forces
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
Gm,m
use the equation F=-
r2
sketch a graph of the gravitational force between two masses
at increasing separation
Therefore, what we have previously referred to as the acceleration
due to gravity is the same as the gravitational field strength, g. On
Earth, these are 9.81 ms-2 or 9.81 N kg-
WORKED EXAMPLE
What force will a two-tonne elephant feel when it is in the Moon's
surface gravitational field, which has a strength of 1.62 N kg l?
F = mg
= 2000 x 1.62
F=3240N
The attraction of gravity
The current theories about the formation of the galaxies, stars and
planets are all driven by one fundamental underlying force: gravity.
Every particle with mass attracts every other particle with mass. So,
if the Big Bang spread tiny particles across space, they would all
attract each other. The acceleration generated by these tiny forces
might be exceedingly small, but the Universe has plenty of time.
Slowly but surely, the particles move towards each other and clump
together. This effect is more pronounced for particles nearer to each
other, as they attract more strongly than those separated by larger
distances. These clumps of matter will continue to attract other
nearby particles or lumps that have formed, and continue to accrete
into larger and larger bodies of material. This collection of matter
might become a planet, or if enough material gets packed together
densely enough, nuclear fusion may start and it becomes a star
fig B The Moon's weaker gravitational field makes Earth-developed
muscles seem extra strong.
Gravitational forces
[411]
aut corpus aliud quocunque vel graviat coming deliure el
pro quacare I min gravidaret, quoniam id non dil
Fert ab aliis corporibus nifi in forma matrix polidem per-
tacioncm forma gradatim crani i in copus judem oditi
is cum q pro quanpirate materie UNIT ID. Ikimd icant,
(per Hypoth. IILS &vim po g rira, fomum il-
lugradimdundo, polonegritatem fuam grad timantitere.
Ac proinde ponera para a formis pomm, pollentun
formour, cunc. quum godbamelt in Collio
L
Coral 1. : Vacuum neodm. dir. NanG fpatia omnia
plena ellu, rias pecifica Huidi quaragio aerisimlerdir, ob
hammam denliuran m ir, nil de grabaci pafice argents
Vivi, vel ui, yel.corporis alienus cujungus dealitimis & pro-
prerea mesum mque aliud quodainque pusil belt dden-
dere polle. Nam corpora in Hunds, hili pacific graviora fin,
minimne delomdun.
C 4 Gravitatem dicitude à nelen. Nam
ratio
m ea matet me. A . Corporaliqua
magis crabuccur, alia mimin, plurima non trabuntur. Eflques
matica longe major pro quirtint materie quam via guavitatis
foto in cudem compare intendi pont & reist rooli vend
edecek in ratione dulmur pluhuam duplex, propte
rea quod is longe fast fit in coducti, quum CHET T ILL
vel murumunun Ipirantur ab invicem.
[411]
L (put TropLXIX. Lib.I.& Corollaria) Quirater inom-
19Protionalem alle munix n üldem.
Poco cum Planar un punto
da graditi Plan
tamquamvi , & gravius partis cujulque li ad gravitatcm -
HUN, ir materia puntis ad TGITTIM doniom recto
Iperm Legeu teritam) milis lit; Plati in promo
Planet i cilim gravicabit, & crit graviasu in potem
quamque ad vita m in dan , UE Maria partis ad mare
gian . LED
Carok. Origiour & cop a grivits in Plinta TL
e gravite in Pites linguas. Cujus rei ereimpla habemus in
tionibus Menericis & Eletricis Critur derim i o om...
mis in om C Antrahamis au partes fingula. Hes includtur
in gravitat, complendo Plancras plures minore in unum Clo
bum cote & Plantam majtuem componec. Nam vhs CX
b arium componenti ocini debebit. Siquis objicit quod
corpora omnia, que apud fint, clave garicare deberent in
lem , men painodi quarius caciquam enim: RO
fpondeo quod gravitas un tax cour, eum fit ad gravitatem in
fototan Gunthe orporal Tankim Docunt, lenge mi
wird quam az lencia polit
Carol Gravito ngulo corpe particulas quales et
Mipro we quadratum dilantiz lozim pesticuliu. Pale per
Cool - Prop. LXXIV. Lib.I.
For VII. Theor. VIL
fig A Gravity drives the formation of stars - here from clouds of gas in the
Carina nebula.
l'eup. VII. Ther, VIL
SG Borum
Wake wat
Gripamer
ratiu
rat in
r
w
,
aw
a n
dan internet
Planetes omnes in fe i te effe jam se proburile, u
Le graviranom in unumquemque foolim ptatum dilarapructur
quadraticillin locorum ccrto Place, Erinden egen
bbb
Pubquam inveniffem pravilno in Planctam com crici
Couponis gravitub in
P o l in prengulas recipe
Like electric fields created by charged particles, a massive particle
will also generate a radial gravitational field around itself. A particle
that has mass will feel a force when it is in a gravitational field.
Unlike electric fields, gravity is always attractive.
The force that a body will feel is the strength of the gravitational field
(g) multiplied by the amount of mass (m), as given by the equation:
F= mg
From this force equation, we can also see how quickly a massive
particle would accelerate. From Newton's second law we know
that F= ma, so we can equate the two equations:
F= mg = ma
fig C As with much of modern science, the law of the force of gravity between
two objects was first published by Sir Isaac Newton.
Newton was the first scientist to publish the equation that gives us
the gravitational force between two masses, m, and my, which are
separated by a distance, r, between their centres of gravity:
F- Gmim
a = m = g
where G is the Gravitational constant, G= 6.67 X 10-11 Nm2 kg-2
So
164
THINKING
BIGGER
VOLCANO MONITORING
WP
Volcanology is the study of volcanoes. The importance of detailed scientific research into the
development and explosions of volcanoes was highlighted by the 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajökull in
Iceland, which closed much of Europe's airspace for nearly a week.
The extract below is a section from the book Introducing Volcanology, which explains how internal
changes within a volcano, which might be precursors to an eruption, can be monitored by their
effects on the local gravitational field strength.
GRAVITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC MONITORING
63.8' 25 Sept. 2009 - 20 March 2010
63.7*
Latitude (degrees N)
Eyjafjallajökull
Katla
mmvörðuháls
63.6
The overall structure and even slight changes in the character
of a volcano at more local scales can be studied using gravity.
A general survey of the gross volcanic structure using gravity
can provide an understanding of any underlying anomalies that
may relate to the presence of dense or light bodies beneath the
structure. Gravity measurements may also be used to get much
closer to understanding what's happening in the magma plumbing
before and even during eruptions. To do this a technique known
as microgravity provides much more necessary detail. This is a
geophysical technique that can measure minute changes in the
Earth's gravity. It must be corrected to take account of any ground
movements that are occurring at the same time, as these will have
an effect on the overall gravity measurement. Filling of a magma
chamber with new magma, or the vesiculation of an existing
magma reservoir, prior to eruption, will change the density
of the surroundings and can be picked up with microgravity.
Electromagnetic fields (EM) are also used to provide quite a
sensitive source of measurement in the shallow parts of a volcanic
system, partly due to limitations on the penetration depth that
can be recorded. EM signals can be affected by the electrical
resistivity which can be changed by fluids, and changes in the
geomagnetic field, altered by magma movement and magma type.
These measurements, when combined with other remote sensing
techniques, can be very powerful tools with which to monitor the
shallow volcanic system.
LOS Displacement
63.51
0.0 15.5 mm
-19.8°
-19.6" -19.4"
Longitude (degrees W)
5 km'
-19.2
fig A Mapping volcanic land deformation around the Fimmvörðuháls volcano
in Iceland, using interference patterns (the coloured bands) between
satellite maps from different times Adapted by permission from
Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Intrusion triggering of the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull
explosive eruption, 468, pp. 426-3, by Sigmundsson, F. et al., copyright
2010.
Extract from pages 86-87 and page 89 (in Chapter 9) of Introducing
Volcanology by Dr Dougal Jerram, ISBN 978-1-90671-622-6, published by
Dunedin Academic Press (2011).
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1
6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
168
Gravitational fields
11.1
Over small distances, in which g does not change significantly, this
can be calculated using the actual distance change:
-AVgrav
WORKED EXAMPLE
At what distance from a proton would its gravitational attraction
for an electron be the same as its electric attraction of that electron
when held 10 metres away? Comment on the answer.
Electrostatic force:
k9192
r2
90 x 109 x 1.6 x 10-19 x -1.6 x 10-19
gax= -AV grav
As the potential was defined per unit mass, and is already a
negative value, the magnitude of the actual gravitational potential
energy change for an object of mass m will then be given by:
E = mx AV grav = mgax
which we have previously used (see Book 1, Section 2.2.1) as:
AE, = mgah
102
...
F= -2.3 x 10-30 N
Gravitational attraction:
F = GMM
= 2.3 10-30 N
Gmme
2.3 x 10-30
= 4.41 x 10-38
Electric and gravitational fields
You may have noticed something familiar about the equations
we have been using to calculate gravitational forces and fields.
Mathematically, they are of exactly the same form as those we
used to calculate the force between charged particles, electric
potential and electric field strength. The only differences are the
symbols we use to represent the quantities causing the fields, and
the constants of proportionality. The similarities come from the
fact that both types of field are radial from a point. The constants
of proportionality depend upon the way the forces interact with
the fabric of the Universe, and with the unit system that we use in
the calculations.
r = 2.1 x 10-19 m
The distance between the two centres of gravity, therefore, is
smaller than the radius of a proton, so it would be impossible for
the electron to get this close. Gravity is an extremely weak force
in comparison to the other three forces, in nature, but it affects all
matter, not just things that are charged
Gravitational field
Quantity
Questions
Electrical field
k9192
Gm, m2
force
FE
Calculate the gravitational field strength and gravitational potential
at the orbit of a polar satellite that travels at 900 km above the
surface of the Earth.
field strength
potential
table A Gravitational and electric fields compared. Remember, the Coulomb
law constant k = = 9.0 x 10°Nm-C-2
Compare the magnitudes of the force of attraction between an
electron and a proton in a hydrogen atom (radius = 0.53 10-10 m)
with the gravitational attraction of the Sun on Pluto. Pluto has a mass
of 1.29 x 1022 kg and orbits at an average distance of 5900 million
kilometres from the Sun.
4TÉO
3 What would the mass of the Moon have to be for the Earth's gravity
to exert the same force of attraction on it as the electrostatic
attraction of the proton for the electron in a hydrogen atom?
Although the force and field strength of the gravitational and
electrical fields share the same form, they do differ in some
significant ways. Whilst gravitational forces are always attractive,
electric forces are not. As electrical charges can be either positive
or negative, the electric field can be in either direction to or from
a charge. A charged particle can be shielded from an electric field,
but a massive particle cannot be shielded from a gravitational
field. In addition, the electromagnetic force is significantly stronger
than the gravitational force.
There is a point on the line between the centres of the Earth and the
Moon where their gravitational fields have equal magnitude but are
in opposite directions, effectively creating a point of zero gravity.
Calculate the distance of this point from the centre of the Earth.
(Mass of the moon = 7.35 x 1022 kg)
Key definition
Gravitational potential is the amount of work done per unit mass to
move an object from an infinite distance to that point in the field.
167
Gravitational fields
11.1
WORKED EXAMPLE
The speed of the Moon comes from the time it takes to orbit:
217
(a) What force will exist between two neutrons in the Crab Nebula
which are separated by a distance of two metres?
F Gm, mz
6.67 x 10-11 x 1.67 x 10-27 x 1.67 x 10-27
_21 x 3.84 x 108
2.36 x 106
v= 1020ms-1
3.84 x 108 x 10202
6.67 X 10-11
mg = 6.02 x 1024 kg
F = 4.65 x 10-65 N
(b) How quickly will each accelerate towards the other (ignoring
the effects of all other particles)?
a= m.
4.65 x 10-65
1.67 x 10-27
= 2.78 x 10-38 m 2
(c) Why is it difficult to calculate how long they would take to
reach each other?
The acceleration is inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them. Therefore, the acceleration is
constantly increasing as they get closer together. Our usual
equations of motion require constant acceleration.
fig D Weighing the Earth can be done by observing the Moon.
Questions
| Explain why the weight of an object on the Earth is found by
multiplying its mass in kilograms by 9.81.
2
Calculate the gravitational force between two nº particles in deep
space, if they are 8 metres apart. The mass of a neutral pion is
2.40 x 10-28 kg.
3
Weighing the Earth
Newton pondered on how the Moon knows the Earth is there,
when he suggested that gravity keeps the Moon in orbit around
the Earth. The answer to Newton's problem is still not fully
understood by scientists, but his formula can be used to great
effect. It was of vital importance to NASA scientists when they
made calculations in order to send the six Apollo Moon missions
some forty years ago.
Even before space travel, it was possible to use data about the
Moon's orbit to work out the mass of the Earth. The time
period of the Moon's orbit around the Earth is 27.3 days, or
T= 2.36 X 106s. The average orbital radius for the Moon is
384000 km, or r= 3.84 x 108m. From these data, we can
calculate the mass of the Earth:
Gravitational attraction between Moon and Earth, F==
Calculate the gravitational force between the Earth and the Moon if
the Moon's mass is 7.35 x 1022 kg.
4
Calculate the average distance of the Earth from the Sun, if the mass
of the Sun is 2.0 x 1030 kg.
5 Draw a sketch graph to show how the magnitude of the
gravitational attraction, F, between two masses varies with the
inverse square of the separation
Gmmm
Centripetal force required to keep Moon in orbit, F=
Kev definition
A gravitational field is a region of spacetime which is curved. This
curvature will cause particles to experience an accelerating force.
Gravity is the cause of the centripetal force, so these are equal:
Gmimi_mv2
165
Exam-style questions
11.1
(c) The period 7 of a satellite in a circular orbit is given by the
equation
4723
GM
where r is the radius of orbit and M is the mass of the
Earth.
Calculate the period of a satellite in an orbit 4.0 X 105m
above the surface of the Earth.
mass of the Earth = 5.98 x 1024 kg
radius of the Earth = 6.36 x 106m
[2]
(d) After a time the radius of the satellite's orbit will start to
decrease due to the resistive forces acting on the satellite
from the atmosphere. As this happens the satellite speeds
up.
Describe the energy changes occurring as the radius of the
orbit decreases.
[2]
[Total: 12]
[2]
7 (a) State what is meant by the term gravitational field and write
an equation for the gravitational strength acting on a mass
in this room
[2]
(b) Sketch a graph of the gravitational potential. Vgrav at
increasing distance, r, from a mass, M.
(c) Calculate the gravitational potentials at the surface of the
Earth due to:
(i) the Sun
(ii) the Earth.
Mass of the Earth = 6.0 x 1024 kg
Mass of the Sun = 2.0 X 1030 kg
Radius of the Earth = 6.4 x 100m
Radius of the Earth's orbit = 1.5 x 1011 m
G = 6.67 X 10-11 Nm-kg-2
[2]
[Total: 6]
8 Explain the similarities and differences between gravitational
and electric fields.
[Total: 6]
[6]
171
11.1
2
Gravitational fields
WORKED EXAMPLE
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
derive and use the equation g = Gm for the gravitational field
strength due to a point mass
GM.
use the equation Varav = - for a radial gravitational field
Calculate the gravitational field strength caused by the Earth at the
distance of a geostationary satellite, which orbits at a height, h, of
35 800 km above the surface of the Earth. The radius of the Earth,
Re, is 6400 km. From Section 11.1.1 we have the mass of the Earth
as 6.02 x 1024 kg.
Distance from the Earth's centre:
r=RE + h = 42 200 km = 4.22 x 107m
compare electrical and gravitational fields
g-GM
Radial fields
6.67 x 10-11 x 6.02 x 1024
(4.22 x 107)
g = 0.23 N kg
.
Gravitational potential
Potential energy is that possessed by an object by virtue of its
position. The potential at a point in any type of field is the general
concept of the amount of energy needed to get to that position
in the field for any object affected by the field. Therefore for a
gravitational field it is expressed as an amount of energy per
unit mass (Jkg), as mass is what is affected by the field. The
definition of gravitational potential is the amount of work
done per unit mass to move an object from an infinite distance to
that point in the field. As gravitational fields are always attractive,
objects will always gain energy on moving into a point in the
field, and so gravitational potential is always a negative quantity.
Gravitational potential can be calculated at a distance r from a
mass M from the equation:
fig A The radial gravitational field around a point mass.
Any mass will generate a gravitational field, which will then exert
a force on any mass within the field. As gravity is always attractive,
the field produced by a point mass will be radial in shape and the
field lines will always point towards the mass (fig A).
Verar = -GM
WORKED EXAMPLE
Gravitational field strength
The radial field produced by a point mass naturally has its field
lines closer together nearer the mass, as a result of its geometry
(see fig A). This means that the strength of the field decreases
with increasing distance from the mass causing it. The decrease is
significant, and in outer space, as far as it is possible to be from a
galaxy or other particles, there will be regions where there is virtually
no gravity. This can be explained mathematically by the formula
which tells us the strength of a gravitational field at a certain distance,
r, from a mass, M. We have already seen the force on a mass, m,
caused by a gravitational field is F= mg. Also, the gravitational force
on a mass, m, because of another mass, M, is given by Newton's
expression:
Calculate the gravitational potential caused by the Earth, at the
distance of a geostationary satellite, which orbits at a height, h, of
35 800 km above the surface of the Earth. The radius of the Earth,
RE, is 6400 km.
r=RE + h = 42 200 km = 4.22 x 107m
Veran = -GM
-6.67 x 10-11 x 6.02 x 1024
(4.22 x 10")
Vgrax = -9.52 MJ kg
F - GMm
These two expressions are calculating the same force, so must
themselves be equal:
The gravitational field strength tells us how quickly the potential
is changing over distance, and the mathematical connection
between the two is:
GMM = mg
-dVgrav
i.e. the field strength is independent of the object being acted upon.
166
Thinking Bigger
| 111
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this book. Its preface says the book is aimed at
'those with an inquisitive interest as well as the more advanced reader'.
KUVV600000
1. Explain how the author has written at a scientific level appropriate to his target audience.
What has he assumed of the reader's capability, and in what areas has he restricted the
depth of explanation?
2. Why do you think some words and phrases (for example 'vesiculation') are in bold print
in the text?
3. The image in fig A is from two pages after the text, and accompanies a different section
in the book. What is its relevance to the text quoted here?
Given the range of
readers indicated in
the preface, consider
the difficulty that would
have faced the author
in determining what
scientific depth to
include in this section
of text.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
Curcury
Consider the variations
in materials across the
internal structure of the
Earth, and especially in
the Earth's crust.
4. We say that the gravitational field strength at the Earth's surface is 9.81 N kg?
a. Write the equation for the gravitational field strength at the surface of a planet.
b. What assumptions are made in using this equation, which are not really accurate for
planet Earth?
c. Which of these assumptions would be affected by the movements of magma and
gases within a volcano, causing the variation of surface gravity, as described in the
extract?
d. In terms of the equation, how could ground movements also affect the gravitational
field strength?
5. a. Explain how the colour bands in fig A illustrate changes in ground level over time.
b. Why would any variations in ground level not affect the orbital radius of the satellite
that took measurements to generate fig A?
c. What scientific strength is there in comparing the conclusions from fig A and those
from a microgravity survey as described in the text?
6. The section about electromagnetic field testing suggests that the EM signals will be
differently affected by areas of differing resistivity.
a. Explain how the electrical resistivity of regions within a volcano might change
over time.
b. Explain how variations in resistivity could alter the penetration by electric fields.
Activity
Consider the effects of
the gravitational field at
the surface of the Earth
and how these could
lead to a useful system
for measurement. How
could you amplify the
minute variations in
order to generate
detectable differences
in gravity?
Write a design brief for an experiment to measure variations in gravitational field strength. Your
experiment should be capable of monitoring over time, and also over a range of geographical locations
around a volcano. Include instructions for the measurements to be made by the equipment, and what it is
looking for in order to make conclusions.
>
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1
111 YOU ARE
12.1
13.1
HERE
169
11.1 Exam-style questions
1 Which statement is correct?
A Gravitational field strength is a scalar quantity.
B Electrostatic field strength is a scalar quantity.
C Gravitational and electrostatic forces both follow an inverse
square law.
D Gravitational and electrostatic forces are both contact
forces.
[Total: 1]
4 In a physics lesson a student learns that the Earth is 81 times
more massive than the Moon. Searching the Internet, she is
surprised to discover that the gravitational field strength at the
surface of the Earth is only 6 times greater than that at the
surface of the Moon.
Use the above data to compare the radius of the Earth with
that of the Moon.
[3]
[Total: 3]
[1]
2 Which is a reasonable estimate of the gravitational force of
attraction between you and your chair?
A 4 x 10-7N
B 80 kg
C 785 N
D 6400 N
[Total: 1]
5 (a) Derive an expression for the gravitational field strength g
at a distance r from the centre of mass M. Use the list of
equations provided on the formulae sheet (Appendix 8 of
the specification)
[2]
(b) Use your expression to calculate g at the surface of the
Earth.
mass of Earth Me = 5.97 X 1024 kg
radius of Earth Pe = 6.38 x 10m
[1]
[Total: 3]
[1]
3 The Orion spacecraft consists of a capsule (mass = 8913 kg)
and a service module (mass = 12 337 kg) and is designed
to carry four astronauts (mass 80.0 kg each). Calculate the
minimum energy needed to move the fully manned spacecraft
completely outside the influence of the gravitational field of
the Earth.
Mass of the Earth = 6.00 x 1024 kg
Radius of the Earth = 6.40 x 10m
G = 6.67 x 10-11 N m2 kg-2
A 2.12 x 10'J
B 6.30 X 10J
C 1.34 x 1012 J
D 1.36 x 1012 J
[Total: 1]
6 Communications satellites were first proposed in 1945 by the
science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke. In an article published
in the magazine Wireless World he asked whether rocket stations
could give worldwide radio coverage.
In the article Clarke states:
"There are an infinite number of possible stable orbits, circular and
elliptical, in which a rocket would remain if the initial conditions
were correct. A velocity of 8 kms applies only to the closest possible
orbit, one just outside the atmosphere, and the period of revolution
would be about 90 minutes. As the radius of the orbit increases the
velocity decreases, since gravity is diminishing and less centrifugal
force is needed to balance it.'
With permission of Electronics World www.electronicsworld.co.uk
(a) State what is meant in the article by the phrase 'gravity
is diminishing', and criticise the statement that less
centrifugal force is needed to balance (the satellite). [3]
(b) (i) By deriving an appropriate equation, show that the
orbital speed of the satellite decreases as the radius of
orbit increases.
[3]
(ii) By deriving an appropriate equation, show that the
orbital period of a satellite increases as the orbital
speed decreases.
[1]
170
