4.1
Drag act
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand the concept of viscosity
• know how viscosity is related to temperature
and proved the connection between flow rate and viscosity. A
Poiseuille was interested in blood flow through the body,
but his law is immensely important in industrial design. For
example, the rate of flow of liquid chocolate through pipes in the
manufacture of sweets will vary with the chocolate's viscosity,
which will vary depending on the exact recipe used to produce
it. More sugаr may mean greater viscosity and thus slower flow
through the pipes, and so less chocolate per sweet.
Viscosity
Investigation
WP
Investigating flow rates
You can investigate how fluid flow rate depends on the fluid's
viscosity by doing an experiment very similar to those carried out by
Poiseuille in the mid-nineteenth century. Using a constant pressure,
water forced through a narrow pipe will flow at a certain rate,
inversely proportional to its viscosity. By varying the height of the
water tank, you can record measurements of this 'head of pressure
h, against the flow rate. The gradient of the best-fit line will allow you
to calculate the viscosity of the water.
-
-
-
fig A The 'sharkskin' suit helped break many swimming world records at the
Beijing Olympics - it was later banned by swimming's governing body as
WP 'technology doping'. Despite the manufacturer's claim that this was due to
the material's extremely low viscous drag, scientists discovered this to be
false and put the success down to its physiological benefits for athletes.
capillary tube
constant head
apparatus
measuring cylinder
Height Value water Flow rate!
collected in Imst
| 1 minutalcm
OL
20
20
When you wade through a swimming pool, you find it much
harder than walking through air. The friction acting against you is
greater in water than it is in air. This frictional force in fluids is due
to viscosity. If the frictional force caused by movement through
the fluid is small, we say the viscosity is low.
Newton developed a formula for the friction in liquids that
includes several factors. One of these factors relates to the
particular liquid in question. Clearly, it would be even harder to
wade through a swimming pool of treacle than one full of water.
This fluid-dependent factor is called the coefficient of viscosity
and has the symbol n. the Greek letter eta.
As viscosity determines the friction force acting within a fluid,
it has a direct effect on the rate of flow of the fluid. Consider
the differing rates of flow of a river of lava (see table A), a river
of water (1 ms ) and natural gas flowing through a pipeline
(3.5 ms ).
Tube interes diameter 2 r = 2 me: tube length = 20
fig B Experimental set up and sample results for an investigation into
Poiseuille flow.
You can plot a graph of the flow rate (F) against height (h) and hence
calculate the viscosity of water (71).
pgry
Poiseuille's equations tells us that the gradient of the graph =
871
where r is the internal radius of the capillary tube, p is the density of
water, and g = 9.81 N kg!
Lava type
Silica content
Viscosity
Approximate flow
rate/km h-1
30-60
10
basaltic
andesitic
rhyolitic
least
in between
least
in between
most
most
table A How is the rate of flow related to the viscosity of the fluid?
An even greater variation in viscosity of liquid chocolate is
caused by changes in its temperature. The sweet manufacturer
can account for variation in a recipe (which might come from
something as minor as a change in supplier of cocoa beans) by
adjusting the flow rate by altering the temperature. Viscosity is
directly related to fluid temperature. In general, liquids have a
lower coefficient of viscosity at higher temperatures. For gases,
viscosity increases with temperature.
The rate of flow of a fluid through a pipe is inversely proportional
to the viscosity of the fluid. In 1838, Jean Poiseuille, a French
doctor and physiologist, investigated the flow of fluids in pipes
117
4.1
20
Fluid
Temperature/°C Viscosity/Pas
air
0.000017
air
0.000018
air
100
0.000022
water
0.0018
water
20
0.0010
water
100
0.0003
glycerine
-40
6700
glycerine
1.5
glycerine
30
0.63
chocolate
30
100
chocolate
60
table B The viscosities of different fluids at different temperatures.
20
50
Investigation
Investigating how viscosity changes with temperature
You can investigate how the viscosity of a liquid changes with temperature using a re-sealable tin or bottle
half-full of a test fluid (such as golden syrup). The temperature of the liquid is varied using a water bath.
The viscosity of the liquid will affect the rate at which the tin or bottle rolls down a fixed ramp.
water bath -
HEN
fig C How does the viscosity of golden syrup change with its temperature?
Questions
| Why is the world record for 100 m swimming a longer time than that for 100 m sprinting?
2 Describe how temperature affects viscosity for liquids and gases.
3 How and why would holding a swimming competition in a warmer pool affect the times achieved
by swimmers?
4 Why might a chocolate manufacturer alter their machinery so it functioned at a higher temperature?
5 Draw a graph of the experimental results shown in fig B in order to find the viscosity of water. How does
your value compare with the figures in table B?
Key definitions
Viscosity is, essentially, the idea of how resistant a fluid is to flowing (although a complete definition
is beyond the scope of this book).
Coefficient of viscosity is a numerical value given to a fluid to indicate how much it resists flow.
118
Exam-style questions
4.1
6
The photograph shows oil being poured into a cold frying pan
and spreading out.
Explain the difference that using a hot pan would make to how
the oil spreads.
pok. WOL
8 Soil is usually made up of a variety of
particles of different sizes. The photograph
shows what happens when soil is mixed up
with water and the particles are allowed to
settle.
(a) The dot below represents a particle of
the soil falling through water.
(i) Add labelled arrows to show the three forces acting on
the particle as it falls through the water.
[Total: 2]
7 In the game of table tennis a ball is hit from one end of the
table to the other over a small net.
(a) Making a table tennis ball spin when it is hit can affect its
flight. The diagram shows the path of air around a spinning
ball. It contains regions of laminar flow and turbulent flow.
The flow changes from one to the other at points A and B.
air flow
direction
of spin
W
B
WWW
www
direction of
ball's movement
(ii) Explain why a particle held stationary in water and
then released accelerates downwards at first but then
reaches a steady downwards speed.
(iii) Write an expression showing the relationship for these
forces when the particle is falling at a steady speed. [1]
(b) A typical particle of sand in the sample has the following
properties:
diameter = 1.6 x 10-3m
volume = 2.1 x 10-9m3
density = 2.7 x 10 kg m-3
weight = 5.7 x 10-5 N
(i) Show that the upthrust acting on the particle is about
2 x 105 N.
density of water = 1.0 X 10% kg m-3
[2]
(ii) Calculate the steady downwards speed this particle
would achieve if allowed to fall through water.
viscosity of water = 1.2 x 10-Pas
[3]
(c) The different types of particles in soil can be defined
according to their diameters, as in the following table.
Soil particle
Particle diameter
less than 0.002 mm
silt
0.002 mm - 0.05 mm
sand
0.05 mm -2.00 mm
fine pebbles
2.00 mm -5.00 mm
medium pebbles 5.00 mm - 20.00 mm
coarse pebbles 20.00 mm -75.00 mm
The photograph shows that when soil is allowed to settle
in water, the pebbles tend to be found towards the bottom,
followed by sand, silt and clay in succession.
Explain why this happens. Assume that all particles have
the same density.
[3]
[Total: 15]
clay
(i) Explain what is meant by laminar flow and turbulent
flow.
[2]
(ii) The ball is spinning in the direction shown in the
diagram.
Suggest why there is a larger region of turbulent flow
on the top of the ball than the bottom.
[1]
(b) The diagram shows that the air is deflected upwards after
passing the ball.
Explain why this means there must be a downwards
component of force on the ball in addition to its weight. [2]
(c) Spinning a table tennis ball allows it to be hit harder and
still hit the table on the other side of the net.
(i) A table tennis ball is hit, without any spin, from one end
of a table so that it leaves the bat horizontally with a
speed of 31 ms1 The length of the table is 2.7m.
Show that the ball falls a vertical distance of about
4cm as it travels the length of the table.
[3]
(ii) The net is 15 cm high. Explain how the spin helps the
ball hit the table on the other side of the net. [3]
[Total: 11]
9 Explain how a stone dropped into a lake, from the surface, will
reach a maximum velocity as it falls to the lake bottom, and how
this will be different in summer and winter.
[Total: 6]
125
What have I studied before?
How to calculate resultant forces, and their effects
• Free body diagrams
• Newton's laws of motion
• Weight and the acceleration caused by gravity
. Air resistance - its causes and effects
Convection, including as a cause of the movement
of tectonic plates
What will I study later?
• Other thermal properties of fluids, especially
gases (A level)
• Damping of oscillations by fluid drag (A level)
. Forced vibrations, driven by turbulence in flowing
fluids (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
• How to calculate density and upthrust
How friction is caused by fluids, and the effects of
this drag
The meaning of the terms drag, viscosity, laminar
flow, turbulent flow and upthrust
How fluids flow, and what changes their flow
properties
Stokes' law
What we mean by terminal velocity, and what
affects it
Fluids, density and upthrust
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
use the equation defining density
The equation for calculating density works for mixtures and pure
substances, and for all states of matter. Thus, fluid density is also
mass per unit volume.
WORKED EXAMPLES
understand how the upthrust force in a fluid can
be calculated
A house brick is 23 cm long, 10 cm wide and 7 cm high. Its mass
is 3.38 kg
What is the brick's density?
p-
volume V = 0.23 0.10 x 0.07 = 1.61 x 10-3 m3
mass m = 3.38 kg
density 0-
density p= 1.61 x 10-3
3.38
Fluids
Have you ever wondered why it is sometimes so difficult
to get tomato ketchup out of the bottle? The answer is
that the manufacturers make it thick on purpose. Market
research shows that consumers enjoy a certain consistency of
ketchup on their chips, and producing it that thick makes the sauce
flow very slowly
This chapter will explain various aspects of the movements of
fluids, including some of the ways in which fluid properties are
measured. A fluid is defined as any substance that can flow.
Normally this means any gas or liquid, but solids made up of tiny
particles can sometimes behave as fluids; an example is the flow
of sand through an hourglass.
p= 2100 kg m-3
At 20°C, a child's balloon filled with helium is a sphere with a
radius of 20 cm. The mass of helium in the balloon is 6 grams.
What is the density of helium at this temperature?
Density
One of the key properties of a fluid is its density. Density is a
measure of the mass per unit volume of a substance - this is
technically called 'volumnic mass'. Its value depends on the mass
of the particles from which the substance is made, and how
closely those particles are packed:
mass (kg)
density (kg m-3) = -
volume (m)
r= 0.20 m
V =
*** (0.20)
= 0.0335 m2
m = 0.006 kg
0.006
p= 0.0335
p=0.179 = 0.18 kg m-3
Learning tip
As objects expand when they get hotter, the volume depends on the
temperature, and so the density must also be affected by changes
in temperature.
Here is a table showing densities for different materials.
Material
air
State
gas (sea level, 20°C)
liquid (4 °C)
liquid (20°C)
solid
Density/kg m 3
1.2
1000
1839
pure water
sulfuric acid (95% conc)
cork
240
919
ice
solid
window glass
solid
2579
iron
solid
7850
gold
solid
19 320
table A Examples of density values solids, liquids and gases.
fig A Density is very important in determining how heavy an object is.
112
TOPIC 4
Materials
CHAPTER
4.1
Fluids
Introduction
Early in this book, we calculated the motion of objects, following Newton's laws, and assuming zero
air resistance. How safe was that assumption? Urban legends talk of coins dropped from high
buildings cutting deep into the concrete below - are the legends actually true? A very rough and
ready, back-of-an-envelope calculation, using estimates of average coin size and mass, and the strength of
the concrete suggests that from a height of 100 metres, a falling coin could indeed penetrate tens of
centimetres ... if it fell in a vacuum.
Depending upon the exact real effects of air resistance, the falling coin might well tumble in flight, slowing
it significantly, and hit the ground at a much lower speed than the theoretical estimate made above. Most
likely, it will land with an impact similar to that of a hailstone.
In this chapter, you will see how gases and liquids behave when flowing, or when causing friction with
moving solid objects, along with learning about some of the factors that can affect these movements.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the unit for density, kg m)
• Visualising and representing 3D forms and finding volumes of rectangular blocks, cylinders and spheres
(e.g. finding the volume of an object as a step towards finding its density)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. re-arranging the Stokes' law equation)
• Solving algebraic equations (e.g. finding the depth at which a barge floats in a river)
Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. an upthrust calculation)
• Determining the slope of a linear graph (e.g. finding the viscosity from terminal velocity data)
110
4.1 Exam-style questions
Add to the diagram to show the path of the particle falling
through this water flow.
surface
1 What is the mass of a spherical stone with a diameter 25 mm,
if the density of the stone is 2900 kg m-??
(a) 2.82 x 10-9 kg
(b) 24g
(c) 190 g
(d) 3.55 X 108kg
[1]
[Total: 1]
particle
(ii) Complete the diagram below to show water moving
with turbulent flow.
[1]
2 Which is the correct definition of 'laminar flow?
(a) At a given point in a flowing fluid, the velocity of flow
varies uniformly over time.
(b) At a given point in a flowing fluid, the velocity of turbulent
flow is proportional to the viscosity.
(c) At a given point in a flowing fluid, the velocity of flow does
not vary over time.
(d) At a given point in a flowing fluid, the velocity of flow does
not vary over the distance from the centre of flow. [1]
[Total: 1]
(1)
3 Which row in the table is correct?
(iii) Describe the difference between laminar and turbulent
flow.
(iv) Suggest why turbulent flow may be used to move small
solid particles.
[Total: 9]
[1]
A
Gas viscosity
| Increases at higher
temperature
Increases at higher
temperature
Decreases at higher
temperature
Decreases at higher
temperature
Liquid viscosity
Increases at higher
temperature
Decreases at higher
temperature
Increases at higher
temperature
Decreases at higher
temperature
5 Blood clots can lead to heart attacks. Blood flow through
arteries is normally laminar, but an obstruction may cause the
blood flow to become turbulent. This can lead to the formation
of blood clots.
(a) The diagram shows an artery containing an obstruction.
direction of
blood flow
[1]
obstruction
[Total: 1]
4 (a) (i) A small solid particle is falling through water Add
labelled arrows to the diagram below to show the
forces acting on the particle.
[3]
[2]
After passing the obstruction the laminar flow becomes
turbulent in the area marked T
(i) Add flow lines to the diagram to show laminar
flow changing to turbulent flow after passing the
obstruction
(ii) Explain what is meant by laminar flow and turbulent
flow.
[2]
(b) In one experiment on blood flow, the viscosity of the blood
and the velocity of blood flow were measured.
(1) Describe how you would expect the velocity of blood
flow to vary with the viscosity.
[1]
(ii) Suggest and explain how a rise in the temperature of
the blood would affect the velocity of flow. [2]
[Total: 7]
(ii) Explain the condition for the particle to fall at its
terminal velocity
[2]
(b) Flowing water can be used to move solid particles from one
place to another
(i) The diagram below shows water moving horizontally
with a laminar flow.
124
Thinking Bigger
4.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the webpage.
65538806776878901
1. The extract opposite is from the website of the National Ocean Service, an office of the
U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Consider the extract and
comment on the type of writing that is used. Try and answer the following questions:
a. How has the author attempted to maintain the reader's interest in what could be
considered quite a dull subject?
b. Discuss the level of the science presented in relation to the intended audience.
Think about the type of
reader who is likely to
visit the webpage. Also,
think about why the
National Ocean Service
would bother to include
this webpage if it is 'quite
a dull subject
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics earlier in
this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the
answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work in context with what
you have already learned in your course.
2. Explain the information in the first paragraph of the extract, with relation to the heights
of the marks in fig B and the table of the codes shown on a typical load line.
3. Higher on the hull, the timber load line marks allow for additional deck cargo of timber,
which must be loaded with an easy capability to throw this extra cargo overboard.
Explain why the marks are higher, and how and when it could help if this extra deck
cargo were jettisoned.
4. Explain how heavy seas and rough weather would affect the movement of the ship.
including an explanation of the different properties the sea waves might have in a storm;
how this could cause damaging forces on the side of a ship, and the breaking stress of
the hull. Justify your answer.
1780000000000000
Think about how the
density of the water
leads to height of
flotation of the ship.
Would saltier water be
more or less dense than
freshwater? And how
would the temperature
of the water affect its
density?
Activity
1865358788388000
Command word
When the word justify
is used in this context
you are being asked to
give clear evidence to
support your answer
Write a comment piece for a magazine, arguing that despite Plimsoll's campaign being 150 years ago, the
capitalist approach to business has changed little. You should include examples of at least one current
business practice, in the UK or abroad, where safety technology is insufficiently used because of the cost
involved. Your article should include a paragraph explaining to a general audience the science behind the
safety technology mentioned, plus information on your sources of evidence.
Did you know?
In the year 1873-74, around the coastline of the United Kingdom, 411 ships sank, with the loss of 506 lives.
Overloading and poor repair made some ships so dangerous that they became known as 'coffin ships'.
From the website of the National Ocean Service, an office of the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/plimsoll-line.html
.
4.1
YOU ARE
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
HERE
123
Fluids
4.1
Upthrust
When an object is submerged in a fluid, it feels an upwards force
caused by the fluid pressure - the upthrust. It turns out that the
size of this force is equal to the weight of the fluid that has been
displaced by the object. This is known as Archimedes' principle.
Thus, if the object is completely submerged, the mass of fluid
displaced is equal to the volume of the object multiplied by the
density of the fluid:
m = Vp
The weight of fluid displaced (i.e. upthrust) is then found using
the relationship:
W = mg
W
R
fig C (a) If the upthrust on an object is less than its weight, then the object
will sink through a fluid; (b) an object will remain at rest when balanced
forces act on it.
upthrust = 800 N
Floating
Imagine an object lowering into a fluid. The instant the object
touches the surface of the fluid there is no upthrust, because no
fluid has been displaced. As the object sinks deeper into the fluid,
it displaces an increasing volume of the fluid, so increasing the
upthrust acting upon it. If a point is reached when the upthrust
and weight are balanced exactly, the object will stop sinking
further, it will float there. So, for an object to float, it will have to
sink until it has displaced its own weight of fluid.
WORKED EXAMPLE
weight = 800 N
fig B Scuba diving equipment includes a buoyancy control device that can
change volume to displace more or less water. This varies the upthrust
and so helps the diver move up or down.
A giant garbage barge on New York's Hudson River is 60 m long
and 10 m wide. What depth of the hull will be under water if it and
its cargo have a combined mass of 1500 tonnes? (Assume that the
density of water in the Hudson River = 1000 kg m-?)
To float:
upthrust = weight
weight = mg =1500 x 1000 x 9.81 = 1.47 x 107 N
:. upthrust = 1.47 x 107 N
841 01.
Why does a brick sink?
If the house brick from the example calculation of density above
were dropped in a pond, it would experience an upthrust equal to
the weight of water it displaced. This is simply the weight of an
equal volume of water. As the density of water is 1000 kg m-3, the
mass of water displaced by the brick would be:
m = 1000 kg m-3x 1.61 x 10-m* = 1.61 kg
This has a weight of
W = 1.61 x 9.81 = 15.8 N
so there is an upward force on the brick of 15.8 N.
If we compare the weight of the brick with the upthrust when it is
submerged, the resultant force will be downwards:
weight = 3.38 x 9.81 = 33.2 N downwards
upthrust = 15.8 N upwards
resultant force = 33.2 - 15.8 = 17.6 N downwards
So, the brick will accelerate downwards within the water until
it reaches the bottom of the pond, which then exerts an extra
upwards force to balance the weight so the brick rests stationary
on the bottom with zero resultant force.
(a)
The upthrust is equal to the weight of the volume of water
displaced by the hull:
upthrust = pxVx9
where:
volume V = length of hull, I x width of hull, wx depth of hull
under water, d
So:
upthrust = 1000 x 60 x 10xd x 9.81
= 5.89 x 106 xd
d - 1.47 * 107
* 5.89 x 106
d = 2.5 m
The hull will be 2.5 m underwater.
113
4.1
4
Terminal velocity
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
use the equation for viscous drag
use a falling ball method to determine the viscosity of a liquid
Thus, in such a simple situation, the drag force is directly
proportional to the radius of the sphere, and directly proportional
to the velocity, neither of which is necessarily an obvious
outcome.
You have previously learned that acceleration due to gravity
near the surface of the Earth is about 9.81 ms-2 An object falling
in a vacuum does indeed accelerate at this rate. However, it is
unusual for objects to be dropped near the surface of the Earth
in a vacuum (in nearly all such cases a physics teacher is likely
to be demonstrating to a class). In reality, in order to calculate an
object's actual acceleration when falling, we need to take account
of all the forces acting on it, combine these to find a resultant
F
force, and then use Newton's second law (a = m) to calculate the
resulting acceleration.
fig A A skydiver will fall at a constant speed if the forces acting on her
are balanced.
For a falling object such as a skydiver, this means we need to
include the weight, the upthrust caused by the object being in
the fluid air, and the viscous drag force caused by the movement.
The tricky part is that the viscous drag varies with speed through
the fluid, and speed is constantly changing as a result of the
acceleration. Usually, we consider the equilibrium situation, in
which the weight exactly balances the sum of upthrust and drag,
meaning that the falling velocity remains constant. This constant
velocity is the terminal velocity.
fig B Along with Lord Kelvin and James Clerk Maxwell, Sir George Gabriel
Stokes helped to build the reputation of Cambridge University in many
areas of mathematical physics.
For simplicity, we will only consider simple situations, such as a solid
sphere moving slowly in a fluid. Imagine a ball bearing dropping
through a column of oil, for example. If you consider the terminal
velocity of the sphere in terms of the forces in detail, then:
weight = upthrust + Stokes' force
mg = weight of fluid displaced + 6 TIN/V term
where m, is the mass of the sphere and Vterm is its terminal velocity.
For the sphere, the mass m, is given by:
mg = volume x density of sphere a r ps
so the weight of the sphere W is given by:
W, = mg = trpg
For the sphere, the upthrust is equal to the weight of fluid
displaced. The mass m of fluid displaced is given by:
m; = volume x density of fluid = r * PF
so the weight of Auid displaced W is given by:
W = mga pg
Overall then:
Trpg = trag +6 Tr WVterm
We can rearrange the equation to find the terminal velocity:
Trgs-P:)
Vterm
67IT
Cancelling the n and the radius term:
2r-g(05-P)
Learning tip
The phrase 'terminal velocity'is only defined to be applicable to
objects falling under gravity with a constant weight. For a similar
situation horizontally, for example a car using a constant thrust force,
an alternative phrase such as 'maximum velocity' would be more
appropriate.
Stokes' law
In the mid-nineteenth century, Sir George Gabriel Stokes, an Irish
mathematician and physicist at Cambridge University, investigated
fluid dynamics and came up with an equation for the viscous drag
p with an equation for the viscous drag
(F) on a small sphere at low speeds. This formula is now called
Stokes' law:
F = 6 TrTv
where ris the radius of sphere (m), v is the velocity of sphere
(ms-'), and is the coefficient of viscosity of the fluid (Pas).
Vterm =
911
So terminal velocity is proportional to the square of the radius.
This means that a larger sphere falls faster. Furthermore, because
the radius is squared, it falls much faster.
119
4.1
WORKED EXAMPLE
Find the terminal velocity of (a) a steel ball bearing of radius 1 mm and (b) a steel ball bearing of radius
2 mm falling through glycerine in a measuring cylinder.
The viscosity of glycerine is highly temperature dependent: at 20°C we can take n = 1.5 Pas
density of steel = 7800 kg m-3
density of glycerine = 1200 kg m-3
g= 9.81 ms2
(a) For a l mm radius ball bearing
2r-g(e-Pd)
Vterm =
911
2(1 x 10-3)2 x 9.81 (7800 - 1200)
Vterm =
9x 1.5
Vterm = 9.6 x 10-ms-1
(b) For a 2 mm radius ball bearing
2r-g(05-P1)
Vterm
911
Vterm =
2 (2 x 10-3)2 9.81 (7800 - 1200)
9 x 1.5
Vterm = 3.8 x 10-2m 5-1
Comparing the values, you can see that doubling the radius of the ball makes its terminal velocity four
times as great.
Investigation
WP
Investigating terminal velocity
You can investigate the viscosity of a liquid by allowing various differently sized spheres to fall through it
and then measure their terminal velocity and radii.
TTTTTTTTTTTTTIT
fig C How does the terminal velocity of a falling sphere depend on its radius and the viscosity of the fluid?
You can plot a graph of the terminal velocity, Vterm against the square of the sphere radius, r, and hence
calculate the viscosity of water, 7).
2g(Ps-P)
Stokes' law tells us that the gradient of the graph = =
9n
where p, is the density of the material of the spheres and pris the density of the fluid they fall through,
and g = 9.81 N kg ?. You may need to do an additional experiment to find the two densities.
Water is usually not viscous enough to give measurably different terminal velocities in this experiment.
However, if you do use water, you can then compare the answer for its viscosity with that found from the
Poiseuille flow experiment in Section 4.1.3.
120
41
The hydrometer
The idea of floating at different depths is the principle behind the hydrometer, an instrument used
to determine the density of a fluid. The device has a constant weight, so it will sink lower in fluids of
lesser density. This is because a greater volume of a less-dense fluid must be displaced to balance
the weight of the hydrometer. Scale markings on the narrow stem of the hydrometer indicate the
density of liquid
Comparing the density of alcoholic drinks with that of water gives an indication of the
proportion of alcohol they contain. The lower the density, the greater the alcohol content,
as alcohol has a lower density than the water it is mixed with. This has long been the basis
for the taxation of alcohol.
WP
Type of drink
fig D A hydrometer floats lower
in the lower density (more
alcoholic) red wine than in
white wine
still/sparkling cider and perry
still cider and perry
sparkling cider, perry and wine
wine
sparkling wine and made-wine
Alcohol content/aby (alcohol by
volume, given as the percentage
proportion of alcohol)
1.2% <7.5%
7.5% < 8.5%
5.5% < 8.5%
1.2% < 4% aby
8.5% <15% aby
2014 UK taxation rate/£
per hectolitre (1001) of
product
39.66
59.52
264.61
84.21
350.07
table B The greater the percentage of alcohol, the greater the tax on the drink. Source: http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/rates/
alcohol-duty.htm.
Questions
| A bottle of whiskey contains 1 litre of the drink. The mass of the liquid in the bottle is 0.915 kg. What is the
density of this brand of whiskey? (1000 litres = 1 m*)
2
The radius of a hockey ball is 36 mm and its mass is 160 g. What is its density
(a) in gem??
(b) in kg m-??
3
Estimate the mass of air in this room.
4
A golf ball has a diameter of 4.27 cm.
(a) If a golfer hits the ball into a stream, what upthrust does it experience when it is completely
submerged? (Assume density of water = 1000 kg m-3.)
(b) If the mass of the ball is 45 g, what is the resultant force on it when underwater?
(c) Referring to Newton's laws of motion, explain what will happen to the submerged golf ball.
A ball bearing of mass 180 g is hung on a thread in oil of density 800 kg m- Calculate the tension in the
string if the density of the ball bearing is 8000 kg m-3.
6
Estimate your own density.
Kev definitions
Fluid is defined as any substance that can flow.
Density is a measure of the mass per unit volume of a substance.
Upthrust is an upwards force on an object caused by the object displacing fluid.
Archimedes' principle states that the upthrust on an object is equal to the weight of fluid displaced.
Hydrometer is an instrument used to determine the density of a fluid.
114
BIGGER
THE PLIMSOLL LINE ®
Load lines are painted on the side of ships to show how low they may safely sit in the water.
Although usually associated with the British MP Samuel Plimsoll (1824–1898), such lines have been
in sporadic use for hundreds of years.
In this activity, we will look at how the 'Plimsoll line" came to be required by British law.
WHAT IS A PLIMSOLL LINE?
TF - Tropical Fresh Water
LTF - Timber Tropical Fresh Water
LF - Timber Fresh Water
F - Fresh Water
T - Tropical Seawater
LT - Timber Tropical Seawater
LS - Timber Summer Seawater
S- Summer Temperate Seawater
LW - Timber Winter Seawater
W-Winter Temperate Seawater
A commercial ship is properly loaded when the ship's
waterline equals the ship's Plimsoll line.
The Plimsoll line is a reference mark located on a ship's hull
that indicates the maximum depth to which the vessel may be
safely immersed when loaded with cargo. This depth varies with
a ship's dimensions, type of cargo, time of year, and the water
densities encountered in port and at sea. Once these factors have
been accounted for, a ship's captain can determine the appropriate
Plimsoll line needed for the voyage (see fig B).
Samuel Plimsoll (1824–1898) was a member of the British
Parliament who was concerned with the loss of ships and crews
due to vessel overloading. In 1876, he persuaded Parliament to
pass the Unseaworthy Ships Bill, which mandated marking a
ship's sides with a line that would disappear below the waterline
if the ship was overloaded. The line, also known as the Plimsoll
mark, is found midship on both the port and starboard hulls of
cargo vessels and is still used worldwide by the shipping industry.
LWNA - Timber Winter North Atlantic WNA - Winter North Atlantic
IOM
fig A Samuel Plimsoll.
fig B Plimsoll mark on the hull of a floating ship.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
122
4.1
Streamlining
The lines of laminar fluid flow are called streamlines. At any
point on any one of these streamlines, the velocity of the flow will
be constant over time. Remember that velocity is a vector, so this
means that the water at any point in the pipe will always move in
the same direction and at the same speed. The direction and/or
speed may be different in different places, but at any given place
direction and speed must stay constant.
In the wind tunnel in fig C, the smoke would flow over the car in
exactly the same pattern forever if all the wind tunnel factors were
kept constant. Changing the speed of the airflow in the tunnel
allows designers to test how the prototype would behave at faster
speeds, and at what point laminar flow changes to turbulent flow.
fig E A few crystals of potassium manganate(VII) will produce purple trails in the
water flow which can then be made to pass around objects made from
Blu-tack. You can alter the flow rate and the obstacle shapes in order to see
how the flow changes.
Questions
| Give three examples of objects that are designed to reduce the
amount of turbulent flow of air or water over them.
Draw diagrams to illustrate the basic definitions of streamline flow
and turbulent flow. Explain how your diagrams show each type
of flow.
fig C Smoke streamlines show laminar flow of air over a well-designed car.
In turbulent flow the fluid velocity in any given place changes over
time. The flow becomes chaotic and swirling eddies form (you
see eddies when water runs away through a plug hole). A poorly
designed car would causes turbulent flow of air over it. In the
wind tunnel the smoke trails over the car would be seen to swirl
in ever-changing patterns. Turbulent flow increases the drag on a
vehicle and so increases fuel consumption.
Explain these poetic observations of the flow of a Lake District
stream:
'In the gentle time of a late summer, a creek over boulder flowed
smooth.
As autumn fell, floating leaf after leaf skipped round the rock,
chasing like giddy schoolgirls playing "Follow the Leader".
In winter's depth, all frozen stood, ice on stone, stone on ice.
The bright thaw springs a maelstrom, water currents churning and
swirling as drunken Maypolers.'
Key definitions
Laminar flow/streamline flow is where a fluid moves with uniform
lines in which the velocity is constant over time.
Turbulent flow is where fluid velocity in a particular place changes
over time, often in an unpredictable manner.
Streamlines are lines of laminar flow in which the velocity is
constant over time.
fig D Increased speeds change streamline flow to turbulent flow.
Investigation
Investigating types of flow
Turbulent flow was first demonstrated by Osborne Reynolds in 1883
in an experiment showing coloured water flowing in a glass tube.
You can set up a similar experiment to show turbulence caused by
faster fluid flow, or by different shapes of obstacles. At most speeds,
a smooth, curved obstacle will produce less turbulence than a
squarer one.
116
4.1
Fluid movement
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand the terms laminar flow and turbulent flow
If you ski down a hill, you can go faster by tucking your body into a crouching position. By presenting
a smaller area to air resistance, you reduce the force slowing you down. However, speed skiers
chasing world record speeds go further in their efforts to increase their speeds.
fig A Why does this skier have such an oddly shaped helmet and adaptations to their suit's lower legs?
Laminar flow
When a fluid moves, there are two ways this can happen: laminar flow (also called streamline
flow) and turbulent flow. In general, laminar flow occurs at lower speeds, and will change
to turbulent flow as the fluid velocity increases past a certain value. The velocity at which this
changeover occurs will vary depending upon the fluid in question and the shape of the area through
which it is flowing
If we take a simple example such as water flowing slowly through a pipe, it will be laminar flow.
Think of the water in the pipe as several concentric cylinders from the central axis outwards to the
layer of water in contact with the pipe itself. Friction between the outermost layer and the pipe wall
means this layer will only be able to move slowly. The next layer in will experience friction with the
slow-moving outermost layer, but this will be less than the friction between the outermost layer and
the pipe. Thus, this inner layer will move faster than the outermost layer. The next layer in moves
faster again, with the velocity of each layer increasing nearer the centre, where a central cylinder of
water is moving the fastest.
As with most areas of scientific investigation, Isaac Newton produced much work on the subject of
fluid flow. In particular, he is credited with the development of equations to describe the frictional
force between the layers in streamline flow. If a liquid follows his formulae, as most common liquids
do, it is known as a Newtonian fluid.
laminar
flow
pipe
fig B Laminar flow in a pipe shows streamlines of different but unchanging velocities.
115
Fluids
4.1
Viscous drag
You would find it difficult to wade through a swimming pool filled with treacle because of the
treacle's viscous drag. This is the friction force between a solid and a fluid. Calculating this fluid
friction force can be relatively simple. On the other hand, it can be very complicated for large objects,
fast objects and irregularly shaped objects, as the turbulent flow creates an unpredictable situation.
It must be remembered that the simple slow-falling sphere of Stokes' law is not a common situation
and in most real applications the terminal velocity value is a result of more complex calculations.
However, the principle that larger objects generally fall faster holds true for most objects without
a parachute.
Terminal velocity/ms-
60
Falling object
skydiver
golf ball
hail stone (0.5 cm radius)
raindrop (0.2 cm radius)
14
table A The terminal velocities of various objects falling in air. Note that the skydiver value varies greatly with the shape
in which the body is held when falling.
Questions
| Use Stokes' law to calculate the viscous drag on a ball bearing with a radius of 1 mm, falling at 1 mms-
through liquid chocolate at 30°C.
2 Why is it difficult to calculate the terminal velocity for a cat falling from a high rooftop?
3
A spherical meteorite, of radius 2 m and made of pure iron, falls towards Earth.
(a) For its fall through the air, calculate the meteorite's terminal velocity.
(b) The meteorite lands in a tropical freshwater lake that is at 20°C and continues sinking underwater.
Calculate its new terminal velocity.
(c) What assumptions have you made in order to make these calculations?
(See tables of density data in Section 4.1.1 and viscosities in Section 4.1.3.)
4 Use table A to make an estimate of the terminal velocity of the cat in question 2.
5
The experiment shown in fig C was carried out using glycerine as the liquid through which the sphere was
dropped, but the experiment was repeated at different temperatures from 10°C up to 50°C.
(a) () In what way would the density of the glycerine change as the temperature increased for each
experiment.
(ii) In what way would the density of the ball bearing change as the temperature increased for each
experiment.
(b) In what way would the upthrust on the ball bearing change as the temperature of the glycerine was
increased for each experiment.
(c) Explain how the viscosity of glycerine changes as the temperature increases (see table B in Section 4.1.3).
(d) At each temperature, the student drew a graph of terminal velocity against the square of the radius of
the ball bearing. Explain how the gradient of the graph would change with the temperature changes,
and why.
(e) Why is this experiment likely to be inconclusive if water were used instead of glycerine?
Key definition
Terminal velocity is the velocity of a falling object when its weight is balanced by the sum of the
drag and upthrust acting on it.
121
