What have I studied before?
How to calculate resultant forces
The deforming effects of forces
Experimental measurements on wires
The idea of general properties of materials, rather
than properties of specific objects
The testing of materials for use in hockey
goalkeeping equipment
What will I study later?
• Oscillations of springs, with calculations using the
spring constant (A level)
How resonant vibration depends on the physical
strength of an object (A level)
Non-conservation of momentum, and
deformation in collisions (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
• How an object deforms when a force is applied
along its length
How to calculate stress and strain
• The meaning of the Young modulus for a material,
and how to calculate it
How to undertake an experiment to measure the
Young modulus for a material
How to interpret stress-strain curves in order to
analyse the strength of a solid material
How these ideas can be applied to materials in
use in real applications
127
4.2
1
Hooke's law
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand Hooke's law and be able to make calculations
using it
calculate the elastic strain energy stored in a deformed
material sample
wwwwwwwwwwww
estimate the elastic strain energy stored from a
force-extension graph for a sample
w
Whenever a force acts on a material sample, the sample will be
deformed to a different size or shape. If it is made longer, the
force is referred to as tension, and the extra length is known as
the extension. For a material being squashed to a smaller size,
both the force and the decrease in size are called compression,
although the decrease in size could be referred to as a negative
extension
wwwwwwwwww
-
-
As the bar is pulled, an increase
in its length occurs, as the dotted
area indicates.
fig B The middle spring is extended in proportion to the applied load, obeying
Hooke's law. The right-hand spring has been stretched beyond its limit of
proportionality, so no longer obeys Hooke's law.
Hooke's law is best described mathematically with the equation:
force applied (N) = stiffness constant (Nm-') * extension (m)
AF = KAX
fig A A tensile force causes extension. A compressive force causes a negative
extension.
Learning tip
WP
The stiffness constant for a spring is usually referred to as the
spring constant. Either phrase refers to k in the Hooke's law equation.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Hooke's law
Robert Hooke, a contemporary and vigorous rival of Isaac
Newton, was an exceptional experimental scientist. His interests
were immensely diverse, and the law that bears his name is
arguably one of his least notable achievements.
Hooke's law states that the force needed to extend a spring is
proportional to the extension of the spring. A material only
obeys Hooke's law if it has not passed what is called the limit
of proportionality.
Up to a certain limit of proportionality, the force needed to extend
a spring is proportional to the extension of the spring. If an object
is subject to only a small force, it will deform elastically. When the
force is removed, it returns to its original size and shape, providing
the elastic limit was not passed. We will look in much more
detail at elastic and plastic deformation in Section 4.2.3.
A spring has a stiffness constant of 50 Nm-l, and is 3.0 cm long
naturally. How long would it be if a 200g mass were hung from it?
Weight force:
W = mg = 0.200 x 9.81 = 1.962 N
AF = KAX
AF 1.962
202 = 0.03924 m = 3.924 cm
final length = original length + extension
L = Lo + Ax = 3.0 + 3.9
L = 6.9 cm
Ax =
-50
128
TOPIC 4
Materials
Solid material
properties
CHAPTER
4.2
Introduction
You probably never consider the likelihood that a bridge will fail as you walk or drive over it.
However, when designing the bridge, and selecting the materials to use in it, an engineer has to
ensure that it will survive come what may.
Design processes for any new project will need to include specifications of what extremes of conditions it
has been designed for. A bridge would need to withstand an overloaded lorry flouting any signposted
weight restrictions, a snowboarding helmet might be used by a person on a snowmobile; or an exasperated
motorist might try to use a climbing rope to tow their car. Some of these uses might be classed as
unreasonable, and the designer would not expect to have to make their product strong enough to stand up
to such extreme forces.
If you were designing a new harbour wall, what extreme weather conditions would you ensure that it
could withstand? Would it be good enough to make sure it could withstand a storm with such strong winds
and waves that only occurs once every 50 years? 100 years? 1000 years? And how do you achieve the
standard required within budget?
In this chapter we will see how the strength of materials can be measured, and thus how to choose the
right material for any given job.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the pascal, Pa)
• Calculating areas of circles (e.g. finding the cross-sectional area of a wire in order to find stress)
• Use of standard form and ordinary form (e.g calculating Young modulus)
Making order of magnitude calculations (e.g. comparing Young modulus for different materials)
Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. re-arranging the stress equation)
• Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. calculating the strain)
Determining the slope of a linear graph (e.g. finding the Young modulus from experimental results)
• Estimating, by graphical methods as appropriate, the area between a curve and the x-axis, and realising
the physical significance of the area that has been determined (e.g. finding the energy stored in a
stretched material from graphical data)
126
Exam-style questions
4.2
[2]
1179
272
(a) Explain whether the spring obeys Hooke's law. [2] 9 The photograph shows a flygun.
(b) Show that the spring constant k of the spring is about
20 Nm-
(c) The original length of the spring is 41.0 cm and the length
of the tin is 9.0cm.
(i) Calculate the force that must be applied to the spring
The flygun consists of a handle, a spring and a disc as shown in
to get it into the tin.
[2]
the photograph below.
(ii) Calculate the energy stored in the spring when it is
compressed to fit into the tin.
(d) In fact the bottom of the tin contains a device that makes
a squeak when the spring is released, making the internal
length of the tin less than 9.0 cm.
Explain the effect this has on the speed at which the spring
When the trigger is pulled, the compressed spring is released,
leaves the tin.
[3]
[Total: 12]
launching the disc at the fly.
8.07
8 The diagram shows a submarine and one of the forces acting 7.0-
on it. The submarine moves at a constant depth and speed in
the direction shown.
water surface
direction of motion
6.0-
Force/N
thrust
[2]
(a) Add labelled arrows to show the other three forces on the
submarine.
[2]
(b) State two equations that show the relationship between
the forces acting on the submarine.
(c) The submarine has a volume of 7100 m.
Show that the weight of the submarine is about 7 X 107N.
Density of sea water = 103 kg m-3
[2]
(d) The submarine can control its depth by changing its
weight. This is done by adjusting the amount of water
held in ballast tanks.
As the submarine dives to greater depths the increased
pressure of the surrounding water produces a compressive
strain.
(i) Explain what is meant by compressive strain. [1]
(ii) This decreases the volume of the submarine. Explain
the action that should be taken to maintain a constant
depth as the volume of the submarine is decreased. [2]
(iii) The submarine is made from steel. Suggest why a
material, such as fibreglass, which has a much smaller
Young modulus than steel would be unsuitable at
greater depths.
[2]
[Total: 11]
1.0-
0.04
0.00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 0.8
Compression/cm
(a) Show that the force constant for the spring is about
1000 Nm!
[2]
(b) The spring is 6.3 cm long. What it is compressed in the gun,
the length of the spring is reduced to 1.6 cm.
Assuming that the spring obeys Hooke's law throughout
the compression, show that the energy stored in the spring
before firing the gun is about 1 J.
[2]
(c) The disc and spring have a combined mass of 9.4 g.
(i) Show that the maximum speed at which they can be
fired is about 15 ms-1.
(ii) State an assumption that you have made.
[1]
(d) The gun is fired at a fly on the wall 3.0 m away. The gun is
fired horizontally.
(i) Calculate the velocity of the disc as it hits the wall.
Ignore the effects of air resistance.
(i) The fly is 20 cm below the horizontal level at which
the gun is fired. Show that the disc is close enough to
hit the fly if it does not move. The disc has a radius of
3 cm.
[3]
(e) Suggest an advantage of the disc used over a solid disc. [1]
[Total: 15]
139
Solid material properties
4.2
WE
Investigation
Investigating stress-strain relationships for metals
paper flag
G-clamp
ruler
clamp-on
pulley
load
safe landing pad
fig C An experiment to find the stress-strain relationships when stretching a metal wire. With detailed analysis of the
stress-strain graph of the metal, you can find the Young modulus.
You can perform a simple experiment to measure the stiffness constant - the Young modulus - for a metal
by stretching a thin wire. The original length and diameter of the wire must be measured first. Then, using
increasing forces as the independent variable, you will need to take measurements of the extension
corresponding to each force. There will be some readings during the wire's elastic deformation region which
will increase uniformly. Beyond the elastic limit, it will increase with greater extensions for each increase in
the load force until, eventually, the fracture stress will be reached and the wire will snap. Safety goggles must
be worn during this experiment, as wires that snap under tension pose a significant hazard to the eyes.
The graph in fig B has been plotted with the strain on the x-axis, so that when the gradient of the line is
calculated this will give you the value for the stiffness constant, or Young modulus:
AYO-E
WP
gradient, m =
You will remember that normal practice is to plot experimental results with the independent variable on
the x-axis. Although your experiment will have the stress as the independent variable, it is usual to draw
the curve of these results with stress on the y-axis. Plot this graph and find the Young modulus of the metal
you used, by finding the gradient of the straight-line portion of the graph.
Questions
Estimate the limit of proportionality for the IMPRESS alloy at 750 °C, as shown in fig B.
2
Searle's apparatus is used in experiments to find the Young modulus for a metal wire. With this apparatus,
the test wire hangs vertically, parallel to an identical control wire. Weights are added to load the test wire
only, and its extension, measured as an excess over the length of the control wire rather than from its
original length, is calculated. Explain how this setup will allow the experimenter to avoid possible error
caused by variations in the room temperature.
fig D Searle's apparatus.
135
Solid material properties
4.2
WORKED EXAMPLE
In fig C, how much elastic strain energy is stored in the spring
when it is extended by 2.5 cm?
Investigation
WP
Investigating Hooke's law
You can perform a simple experiment to measure the stiffness
constant for a spring. By hanging various masses on a spring and
measuring the corresponding extensions, you can gather a set of
results for AF and Ax. In each case, you could calculate the spring
constant from a pair of readings, but you will get a more accurate final
answer for k if you plot a graph of the results and find its gradient.
At Ax = 2.5 cm, the corresponding force value is F = 6.0 N.
AEJ = FAX
AE2i = 1 * 6.0 0.025
AE = 0.075)
Mass/
Weight/
Original
length/cm
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
Loaded
length/cm
2.4
2.8
3.1
3.6
Extension/
cm
0.0
0.4
0.7
1.2
00.000
100 0.981
200 1.962
300 2.943
400 3.924
500 4.905
600 5.886
800 7.848
1000 9.810
3.9
1.5
1.9
2.4
4.3
4.8
5.8
6.5
Work from force-extension and force-compression
graphs
The work done in deforming a material is calculated by multiplying
the extension or compression by an appropriate average force
value. If the force is varying in a non-linear way, which is common
for some materials, finding the average force may not be a
straightforward process. However, the area between the line on a
force-extension (F-Ax) graph and the extension axis will represent
the work done. Finding the area under the line is easy with the
linear type of relationship, shown in fig C. As the area under the
line on fig C is a triangle, the formula for the area of a triangle
gives us the same equation as was used above:
AESI = FAX
If the relationship is non-linear, as shown in the example of fig D,
the work done can still be found from the area under the line.
WORKED EXAMPLE
L
2.4
3.4
4.1
2.4
2.4
10.07
9.07
Weight force/N
OOOOO
1.0-
0.0-
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0
Extension/cm
fig C The results of a Hooke's law investigation of a spring before it reaches
its elastic limit. The fact that the best-fit line is straight shows that the
spring obeys Hooke's law.
The graph in fig C has been plotted with the dependent variable on
the x-axis, so that when the gradient of the line is calculated, this will
give you the value for the spring constant:
Gradient, m = 4y - AFK
What is the elastic strain energy stored in the material shown in
fig D if it is extended by 12 cm?
The area under the line, up to the value Ax= 0.12 m, can be split
into three sections:
• Triangle from origin to x = 0.04 m:
area = 3 * base x height = 1 *0.044 = 0.08)
• Rectangle from x = 0.04 m to x = 0.08 m:
area = base x height = 0.04 x 4 = 0.16]
• Trapezium from x = 0.08 m to x = 0.12 m:
area = base x average height = 0.04(4 + 6)/2 = 0.20J
total work = 0.08 +0.16 + 0.20
elastic potential energy = 0.44)
F/N
Elastic strain energy
The work done in deforming a material sample before it reaches its
elastic limit will be stored within the material as elastic strain energy,
Ed. We have previously seen that work done can be calculated by
multiplying the force by the distance moved in the direction of the
force. This is true in deforming materials too, but Hooke's law means
that the force value varies for different extensions. If we plot the
extension of a spring with increasingly large masses hanging on it,
as in fig C, the graph will follow Hooke's law. To find the work done
to extend the spring a certain amount, we must calculate using the
average force over the distance of the extension.
AES = FAX
w
0 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 x/m
fig D The elastic potential energy stored in a material can be found from a
non-linear force-extension graph by working out the area under the line
up to the required extension.
129
4.2
If a non-linear force-extension or force-compression graph has a curved line, finding the area may
involve estimating or counting the squares on the graph paper under the line. In this case, you will
also need to multiply the number of squares by the elastic strain energy value (Fx Ax) for each
individual square.
Learning tip
Be careful to distinguish
between 'length' and
'extension'. You may be told
either, and you must check
carefully as to whether you
need to calculate the extension
from information you have
about lengths.
Questions
What is the spring constant for a spring that starts at a length of 25 cm and extends to a length of 32 cm
when a mass of 50 g is added?
2
In fig C, how would the line appear different if it were for a spring of constant k = 280 Nm-l?
3
Explain how the elastic strain energy stored in a stretched spring could be calculated from the formula
AE l = 5K(Ax)?
Fig E shows the results of a Hooke's law type experiment loading and unloading a rubber band to an
extension of 24 cm.
1.0-
Loading
Unloading
0.87
Force/N
0.05
0.1
0.15 0.2 0.25
Extension/m
fig E Different extensions during loading and unloading is an example of hysteresis.
(a) From the graph, estimate the work done in loading the rubber band.
(b) When unloading, the rubber band releases the stored elastic strain energy. Estimate, from the graph,
the area underneath the unloading curve, which will be the elastic strain energy released.
(c) The difference and the answers to parts (a) and (b) represents energy lost in this process, which is
mostly used in internal heating of the rubber band. How much thermal energy does the rubber gain
from the complete cycle of loading and unloading?
5
Estimate the elastic strain energy stored in a pair of braces holding up trousers.
Key definitions
Tension is a force acting within a material in a direction that would extend the material.
Extension is an increase in size of a material sample caused by a tension force.
Compression is a force acting within a material in a direction that would squash the material. Also, the
decrease in size of a material sample under a compressive force.
The limit of proportionality is the maximum extension (or strain) that an object (or sample) can exhibit,
which is still proportional to the load (or stress) applied.
A material's elastic limit is the maximum extension or compression that material can undergo and still
return to its original dimensions when the force is removed.
The spring constant is the Hooke's law constant of proportionality, k, for a spring under tension.
For the extension of a material sample, hysteresis is where the extension under a certain load will be
different depending on its history of past loads and extensions.
130
BIGGER
GET ROPED IN
If a manufacturer of climbing ropes is to select a material for a new rope, what properties would they
want the material to have? Apart from low cost, they will need to consider whether it will safely hold
climbers, especially when they fall and the rope has to save them.
In this activity, we will look at some important aspects of the properties of some climbing ropes.
From the website of rope manufacturer DMM International, www.dmmwales.com
WEIGHT NO OF FALLS IMPACT
PRODUCT
LENGTHS (m)
COLOUR DIAMETER
(per m) (UIAA)
FORCE
PROPHET BLUE
8.5 mm 50, 60
49 g 14
6.4 KN
PROPHET RED
8.5 mm 50,60
| 49 g
14
6.4 kN
PRODIGY BLUE
9.8 mm 50, 60, 70, 80 61 g
8.7 kN
PROJECT YELLOW 10 mm 50, 60, 70, 80 648
8.7kN
NEW BREED ORANGE 9.4 mm 50, 60, 70, 80 598
8.8 kN
MIGRANT PURPLE 8.2 mm 50,60
6.3kN
MIGRANT GREEN 8.2 mm 50,60
46g
6.3kN
From the Safety Standards pages of UIAA, the International Climbing and From the 6th edition of Mountaineering: The Freedom of the
Mountaineering Federation
Hills, a climbing book
465
| 11
radius 5 mm
Rope Anchoring
1.00 m
2.30 m
com
n
static elongation
ko
5Kg
80 kg
single rope s 10%
half rope s 12 %
twin rope (double strand)
$ 12%
25 m
before
first drop
peak force
during first drop:
half rope s 8 kN
single rope s 12 KN
Half rope
direction
direction
of force
of force
Fig 7-19. Static equalization: a, line representing direction
of force bisects angle, thus load on the two anchors is equal;
b, direction of force is to one side, thus load on right-hand
anchor is greater than on left-hand anchor.
Angle
Single rope
testing methods
for UIAA 101 UIAA
Above: Static elongation finds the
standard strain for a rope, giving
an indication of its stiffness.
Right: Fall tests indicate the
maximum Impact force felt by a
climber during a fall.
falling mass
half rope 55 kg
single rope 80 kg
F orce on
each anchor
at least 5
drops
without
breakage
60
60%
90
dynamic
elongation
120
150
170
100%
1900
580%
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
136
4.2
The definition for Young modulus also includes the fact that the material must be undergoing elastic
deformation. Beyond the limit of proportionality, this equation will no longer work to calculate the
stiffness of the material.
Learning tip
From the original definitions of stress and strain, the young modulus can also be calculated from:
FX
E = AAX
WORKED EXAMPLE
The copper wire from above has a diameter of 0.22 mm and was stretched using a force of 100N.
What is the Young modulus of copper?
A = r2 = 3.14 x (1.1 x 10-4)2 = 3.80 x 10-4 m2
OF 100
A 3.8 x 10-8
.. o = 2.63 x 10° Pa
F_02.63 x 109
EEE 0.023
E = 1.161011 Pa
(Note that the stress has been calculated from the original data and the unrounded value has been used
in this calculation to give the value shown here.)
100N
1.76 m
0.04m
fig C Copper has a Young modulus, E = 1.16 x 1011 Pa.
Questions
1 What is the strain of an aluminium wire if it extends from 97 cm to 1.04 m?
2 What is the tensile stress in a vertical steel wire that has a diameter of 0.40 mm and a 1.0 kg mass hanging
from it?
3
Use these data to find the Young modulus of human hair: d = 0.1 mm; x = 12 cm; F = 0.60 N; Ax = 1.8 mm.
4
(a) What is the compressive stress in each femur (thigh bone) of a 7 tonne elephant if the bone is a
vertical cylinder with a diameter 25 cm and the elephant is standing normally?
(b) If the Young modulus of elephant bone is 19 GPa, and the femurs are originally 95 cm long, how
much would they reduce in length if the elephant stood up on its back legs? What assumption do you
need to make?
Kev definitions
force (N)
Stress (pascals Pa, or Nm-2) =
cross-sectional area (m2)
JA
extension (m)
Strain (no units) =
original length (m)
The Young modulus is the stiffness constant for a material, equal to the stress divided by its corresponding
strain.
132
4.2 Exam-style questions
1 The pascal is the unit for the young modulus. Which unit is
equivalent?
(a) mm/m
(b) %
(c) Nm-1
(d) Nm-2
[Total: 1]
(a) Explain what is meant by each of the following terms:
limit of proportionality (L)
tensile strength
yield point (Y)
(6) Using crosses and the letters shown above, mark the
‘limit of proportionality' (L) and the yield point' (Y)
on the graph.
[Total: 5]
[2]
2 A 200 g mass hung on a spring stretches it from 8.2 cm to
9.0 cm. What is the spring constant for this spring?
(a) 2.5 Nm-1
(b) 25 Nm-
(c) 250 Nm-1
(d) 250 000 Nm-1
[Total: 1]
6 You are asked to find the Young modulus for a metal using a
sample of wire.
(a) Describe the apparatus you would use, the measurements
you would take and explain how you would use them to
determine the Young modulus for the metal.
(b) State one safety precaution you would take.
(c) Explain one experimental precaution you would take to
ensure you obtain accurate results.
[2]
[Total: 11]
[8]
3 The diagram shows the stress-strain curve for a metal. Which
label corresponds to the Ultimate Tensile Stress for this metal?
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 The photograph shows a tin bought from a joke shop. When
the lid is removed, a long spring, covered in fabric to resemble a
snake, flies out of the tin.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Stress/Pa
Strain/%
The spring on its own is shown here.
- > [1]
[Total: 1]
omwo
4 Explain why the wire used when measuring the Young Modulus
of copper in a school laboratory is long and thin.
[Total: 5]
[5]
The graph shows length against force for the spring.
5
The graph shows how stress varies with strain for a given
material.
Stress
Length/cm
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
Force/N
Strain
138
Thinking Bigger
4.2
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the sources.
857033000
1. The extracts opposite are from three different sources relating to the use of ropes for
rock climbing
a. Compare and contrast the style of presentation from each source.
b. Discuss the safety considerations that the authors (and their insurers) will have had
to consider before publishing the information in each case.
655788080668000
Command word
Note that when the words
compare and contrast are
used, you are expected to
look for both similarities
and differences between
two or more things.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics earlier in
this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the
answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work in context with what
you have already learned in your course.
2. a. Calculate the weight of a 50 m length of DMM's Migrant rope.
b. Calculate the density of DMM's Project rope.
3. a. Explain the physics behind the caption in figure 7-19 from the Mountaineering
book
b. The table of angles from the Mountaineering book refers to the total angle between
the slings in the symmetrical situation shown in 7-19a. Explain why the force on each
anchor would increase as suggested, and calculate how accurately the force
percentages have been reported.
4. a. Looking at the Fall Tests, explain why lower impact force ropes will stretch more.
b. Considering part a., explain why a larger percentage dynamic elongation, compared
with the static elongation, minimises injuries from the rope stopping a fall.
5. A recent update of the UIAA rope testing standards includes a method for calculating
the energy absorbed by a rope before failure. This is given by the equation:
055358068078000
Include an explanation of
what physics term should
have correctly been
used instead of the word
elongation, considering
that it is quoted as a
percentage
erupt
Erupt = 1. FS SDS
tenis
This equation is an 'integaration' which means it calculates the sum of the all the FxS
values over the range of tensions up to rupture. How could such calculations produce
results for ropes which might be presented as in the suggested picture below?
1.72 km
1.6 km
1,7 kJ/mi
1,8 kJ/m
1.9 km
Activity
Write a review comparing the DMM ropes listed in terms of physics properties. Include at least:
• calculations of density, and commentary about which ropes would float in water.
• calculations of stress in each rope under static elongation, when it must support an 80 kg mass, and
assuming the maximum 8% elongation.
comparison of the Young modulus values for each rope, and compare these with their impact forces
transferred in the UIAA fall tests. Is there a relationship?
4.1
4.2
YOU ARE
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
HERE
137
4.2
2
Stress, strain and the Young modulus
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
calculate tensile/compressive stress
calculate tensile/compressive strain
calculate the young modulus
Strain
Tensile (or compressive) strain is a measure of the extension (or
compression) of a material sample, but it takes account of the
original length of the sample. This allows extension comparisons
to be made between samples of different sizes, so that they are
measured under comparable conditions.
extension (m)
strain (no units) =
original length (m)
As strain is a ratio, it has no units. However, it is often expressed as
a percentage by multiplying the ratio by 100%.
WORKED EXAMPLE
If you pull on the two ends of a metal bar, you are unlikely
WP
to deform it at all. However, pulling with the same force on
the two ends of a very thin piece of wire made from the
same metal may have very different results: it will likely extend
elastically, and may pass its elastic limit and start to undergo
permanent deformation. Depending on the specific metal
and the exact dimensions, it is possible that your force may be
strong enough to break the wire. This example demonstrates
that engineers need more information about the forces that may
encountered within the structures they are building than just the
numbers of newtons. You used the same force and the same
metal, but in the case of the metal bar you made no impression on
it, whilst the thin wire broke. To make fair comparisons between
sarnples, we need to consider the forces on them in the context of
their dimensions, as well as the materials from which they are made.
A copper wire of length 1.76 m is stretched by a force to a length
of 1.80 m. What is the tensile strain in the wire?
x (1.80 - 1.76) 0.04
&x= 1.761 76
8 = 0.023 = 2.3%
0.04m
1.76m
fig B This copper wire has a tensile strain of 23%.
Stress
Tensile (or compressive) stress is a measure of the force within a
material sample, but it takes account of the cross-sectional area
across the sample. This allows force comparisons to be made
between samples of different sizes, so that they are measured
under comparable conditions.
force (N)
stress (pascals, Pa, or Nm-2) = -
cross-sectional area (m2)
Young modulus
If a material is deformed elastically, stress will be proportional to
strain, with a constant of proportionality that is a measure of the
stiffness of the material - how much it deforms under a certain
stress. The stiffness constant is called the Young modulus. Thus,
the Young modulus is a measure of the stiffness of a material,
which takes account of the shape and size of the sample, so that
different samples of the same material will all have the same value
for the young modulus. The idea of stiffness is a measure of how
much the material deforms when forces are applied to it.
stress (Pa)
Young modulus (Pa) = -
strain (no units)
WORKED EXAMPLE
A cylindrical stone column has a diameter
of 60 cm and supports a weight of 2500 N
(fig A). What is the compressive stress in
the column?
Area = r2 = 3.14 x 0.302 = 0.2826 m2
2500N
0-F
2500
Learning tip
The stiffness constant, k, from Hooke's law relates to a particular
object, such as a spring. For a material, the Young modulus, E, is the
stiffness constant for the material in general, regardless of sample
size.
A 0.2826
o=8850 Pa
60 cm
fig A This temple support column is under
a compressive stress of 8850 Pa.
131
4.2
Stress-strain graphs
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
interpret stress-strain graphs
understand and apply the terms limit of proportionality, elastic limit, yield point, breaking
stress, elastic deformation and plastic deformation in relation to stress-strain graphs
Stress-strain analysis
From the definition of the young modulus, the stress should be proportional to the strain if a material
is undergoing elastic deformation, so we should get a straight-line graph if we plot stress against
strain. When this is done, we do find a straight-line relationship for small stresses. Once the limit of
proportionality is passed, the internal structure of the material starts to behave differently, and this
means that the graph starts to curve. Depending on the material under test, the graph will go through
various phases as the molecular substructure of the specific material determines its response to
increasing stress. Eventually, the stress will become too great, and the material will fracture. At this
point, the line on the graph must end, as no further data can be obtained about the material.
It cannot withstand higher stresses, so the graph cannot be plotted any further.
plastic region
Stress/Pa
elastic region
Strain/% -
fig A The stress-strain graph for a metal gives detailed information about how the material behaves under different
levels of stress. The gradient of the straight-line portion of the graph will be equal to the value of the Young
modulus.
Learning tin
It can be confusing to see the sections of a stress-strain graph where the line goes down. In reality, these
graphs are generated from results of materials testing in which the strain is continuously increased on a
machine that can measure the stress within a material. This stress can go down if there is a change in the
arrangement of the atomic structure of the material.
Fig A is a generalised stress-strain graph for a metal, such as copper. Most metals will follow the
shape shown here, and there are various areas of interest on the graph.
In the straight-line portion from the origin to point A, the metal extends elastically, and will return to
its original size and shape when the force is removed. The gradient of the straight-line portion of the
graph is equal to the young modulus for the metal.
133
4.2
Point A is the limit of proportionality. Slightly beyond this point, the metal may still behave
elastically, but it cannot be relied upon to increase strain in proportion to the stress.
Point B is the elastic limit. Beyond this point, the material is permanently deformed and will not
return to its original size and shape, even when the stress is completely released.
Point C is the yield point, beyond which the material undergoes a sudden increase in extension as its
atomic substructure is significantly re-organised. The metal 'gives just beyond its yield point as the
realignment - slip-of the metal's atoms reduces the internal stresses.
Learning tip
It is quite common for the limit of proportionality, the elastic limit and the yield point to be in the same
place on the graph. They have been separated here to explain the subtly different ideas behind each.
Point D represents the highest value that the stress can ever attain within this material. It is called the
Ultimate Tensile Stress, or UTS, OU
Point E is the fracture stress, or breaking stress. It is the value that the stress will be in the material
when the sample breaks.
WORKED EXAMPLE
The European Space Agency (ESA) have tested a material known as 'IMPRESS intermetallic alloy. Fig B
illustrates a stress-strain graph for this material at two different temperatures, to see how it would stand
up under different conditions.
Considering first the young modulus, you can see that the ESA have drawn measurements on the graph
to make the calculation of the gradient of the straight-line portions of the graphs for each temperature
plot. For example, at 15°C:
Ay_o_400 MPa
gradient = E=
-
0.3%
E-400 x 106
0.003
E = 1.33 x 1011 Pa
The values labelled as o are the stress values at each temperature, which will result in a permanent
deformation strain of 0.2%. These are in the plastic region, and the permanent deformations are
indicated by the dashed lines connected back to 0.2% on the x-axis.
Ou = 698 MPa
Ou = 0.2 = 718 MPa
700 +--- -
Joz = 520 MPa tot
---------
-
Stress/MPa
03%
Ay = 400 MPa
Ay = 330 MPa
Key
750°C
15°C
0.0
1.5
Strain/%
fig B Stress-strain graphs, at two temperatures, for the IMPRESS intermetallic alloy, for use in the European space
programme.
134
