Momentum
2.3
Newton's third law
Conservation of momentum is directly responsible for Newton's third law. Remember, this told us
that for every force, there is an equal and opposite force. If we think of a force as a means to change
dp
momentum
increase
down
momentum (F= after all) then a force changing momentum in one direction must be countered
by an equal and opposite one to ensure that overall momentum is conserved. For example, if the
gravitational pull of the Earth causes an apple to fall from a tree, the apple gains momentum towards
the Earth. To conserve overall momentum, the Earth must gain an equal and opposite momentum,
This is then caused by an equal and opposite gravitational force on the Earth from the apple.
The immense mass of the Earth means that its acceleration is imperceptible to us.
momentum
increase up
Questions
| A movie stuntman with a mass of 90 kg stands on a stationary 1 kg skateboard. An actor shoots the
stuntman with a 9 mm pistol. The 8g bullet leaves the pistol at 358 ms' and embeds completely in the
stuntman's bulletproof vest. How fast will the stuntman roll away?
fig G Conservation of momentum
causes equal and opposite
forces, as Newton explained in
his third law of motion.
A girl in a stationary boat on a still pond has lost her oars in the water. In order to get the boat moving
again, she throws her rucksack horizontally out of the boat with a speed of 4ms!
Mass of boat = 60 kg; mass of girl = 40 kg; mass of rucksack = 5 kg
(a) How fast will this action make the boat move?
(b) If she throws the rucksack by exerting a force on it for 0.2 s, how much force does she exert?
How can Newton's third law explain the problem suffered by the boy stepping out of the boat in fig D?
In a stunt for an action movie, the 100 kg actor jumps from a train that is crossing a river bridge.
On the river below, the heroine tied to a raft is drifting towards a waterfall at 3 ms. The raft and heroine
have a total mass of 200 kg.
(a) If the hero times his jumps perfectly so as to land on the raft, and his velocity is 12 ms at an angle
of 80° to the river current, what will be the velocity of the raft immediately after his landing? Draw a
vector diagram to show the momentum addition. (Ignore any vertical motion.)
(b) If the waterfall is 100 m downstream, and the hero landed when the raft was 16 m from the bank,
would they plummet over the fall? (Assume the velocity remains constant after the hero has landed.)
(The raft and the waterfall are on the same side of the bridge as he jumps.)
Kev definitions
Conservation of linear momentum means the vector sum of the momenta of all objects in a
system is the same before and after any interaction (collision) between the objects.
An explosion is a situation in which a stationary object (or system of joined objects) separates into
component parts, which move off at different velocities. Momentum must be conserved in explosions.
BIGGER
SAVING HOCKEY
GOALKEEPERS
OBO is a New Zealand based company that manufacture hockey goalkeeping equipment. The
following extracts from their website explain some of their testing lab's capabilities, and report
on a potential new material for use in leg guards.
A PEEK INSIDE THE O LAB
WHY OBO CHOSE NOT TO USE D30
If we are to design and build the world's most protective and
best performing goal keeper equipment we need the facts. The O Lab
is packed full of the world's most advanced impact test equipment...
and a few very clever dudes to test and help
evaluate the results.
A while ago, a radical new protection polymer called D30 was offered
to OBO. Because we are always trying to improve our products we were
excited by the potential of D30 so our designer made a special trip from
New Zealand to England to meet with the D30 creators. He returned
home with lots of information and some samples which we tested in the
purpose-built OBO impact lab... The O lab.
Our impact lab testing showed that while D30 weighed more than two
and a half times the OBO polyethylene and EVA foams, it provided
significantly less protection when dealing with the high speed and
highly localised impact encountered with a hockey ball.
Have a look at the results on the impact graph below (the horizontal axis
is speed, the vertical axis is transferred force - the higher the transferred
force, the less the protection).
Protection comparison of D30 vs OBO foam
for hockey ball impact August 2006
450
400
D30 370/20mm, PE 30/5 mm
LOBO foam PE 180/20 mm, PE 30/5mm
300-
fig A Anatomically
correct crash test
dummy head.
350-
Transferred force (g's)
250-
fig B Data capture software
simultaneously showing video
and concussion data.
Every detail sorted by a small group of smart committed people.
Video capture at speeds up to 2000 frames per second, skin contact
analysis, and accurate concussion measurements.
60 65
70
75
100 105 110
80 85 90 95
Ball speed (kmh)
fig D Protection comparison of D30 vs OBO foam for hockey ball impact.
fig C Ball cannon capable of speeds
in excess of 120 mph
(200 km h).
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
22
2.2
2.3
YOU ARE
HERE
you
3.1
3.2
60
What have I studied before?
Speed, distance, displacement, time, velocity,
acceleration
Resolving vectors
Newton's laws of motion and the kinematics
equations
Ideas about stopping distances of cars, and the
safety features in vehicles
Calculations of momentum and momentum
transfers
What will I study later?
Fluid movements and terminal velocity
• Stress and strain and the deformation of solids
The conservation of momentum in two
dimensions (A level)
Elastic and inelastic collisions (A level)
• The relationship between momentum and the
kinetic energy of a particle (A level)
The importance of particle momentum in the
design of accelerators (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
Calculations of momentum
What we mean by collisions and explosions, and
how momentum is related to them
The principle of conservation of linear
momentum, and an understanding of how to
apply this to problems in one dimension
The relationship between Newton's laws and
changing momentum
53
2.3
1
Momentum
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
calculate the momentum of an object
explain how momentum is gained or lost
Momentum
Momentum is a measure of an object's motion. It is quite difficult to define momentum in words,
but it gives an idea of what will be required to stop the object moving. The best definition is
mathematical:
momentum (kgms-') = mass (kg) * velocity (ms-')
p = mx V
As momentum is the product of mass (a scalar) and velocity (a vector), momentum is a vector. This
means its direction is very important and must be kept in mind. The direction will be the same as
that of its velocity.
fig A Which object moves with the greatest momentum?
WORKED EXAMPLE
An athletics hammer has a mass of 7.26 kg (men's competition standard) and can be released at speeds
in excess of 25 ms. Its momentum at 25.0ms would be:
p = m XV
p = 7.26 x 25.0
p = 182 kg m s-
A bullet can have a mass of 4.50 grams and can be fired at a speed of 925 msl. The momentum of this
example bullet would be:
p = m xv
p = 4.5 x 10-3 925
p = 4.16 kg ms-
From these examples, it would be significantly more difficult to stop a well thrown athletics hammer
than a bullet. So what exactly do we mean by 'more difficult?
TOPIC 2
Mechanics
12.3 Momentum
CHAPTER
Introduction
Collisions can be devastating Vehicle safety is a very important area for technological research,
and much of the science is founded on the concept of momentum and momentum transfer.
Momentum is a property of a moving object. It is larger if the mass is greater and if the object
moves faster. To change the momentum of an object requires a force, and this is how car crashes can be so
damaging. Larger forces cause more damage, whether to the vehicle or its passengers.
Minimising the forces involved in transferring momentum will require knowledge of how momentum
transfers and how to calculate the forces in light of the momentum transfer needed.
Not all momentum changes are dangerous. Rocket science is generally based on maximising the forces
imparted due to a transfer of momentum, by maximising that momentum transfer. This will create
maximum acceleration in order to propel the rocket fast enough to gain enough gravitational potential
energy to leave the Earth. This chapter will show you how the properties of a moving object can tell us its
momentum, and how to calculate the transfer of momentum and thus the forces involved in changing the
movement of an object.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the unit for momentum, kg ms)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. finding the velocity of an object after collision)
• Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. calculating the momentum)
• Plotting two variables from experimental data (e.g. observing changes in momentum over time)
Using sin, cos and tan in physical problems, and making calculations using them (e.g. resolving a
momentum vector)
F043050202
Thinking Bigger
2.3
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the article.
151515800000000
the physics involun. on the type of writinot a sports supply
1. The website opposite was written to support the business activities of a sports supply
company. Consider the article and comment on the type of writing being used. Think
about for example how the physics involved is explained, and the degree of detail
included. Try and answer the following questions:
a. What range of people do you expect might read the OBO website? What would be
the likely scientific background of their customers?
b. On the actual OBO webpage, there are many more pictures, including brief videos,
that we could not fit in this book. How has the ratio of text to images been chosen for
the intended audience, and the website as a medium?
c. Where units have been included, comment on the actual units chosen to measure
the quantities involved.
Command word
When you are asked to
comment on something,
you need think about
Several variables from the
data or information you
are given and form your
own judgement.
55000000000000
Now we will look at the physics in, or connected to, these website extracts. Some of these questions
will link to topics in much earlier sections of this book, so you may need to combine concepts from
different areas of physics to work out the answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help
you put this work in context with what you have already learned in your course.
2. For the testing of the polymer D30, calculate the range of momenta for the test balls
fired from the cannon. (A standard hockey ball has a mass of 160 grams.)
3. Explain, with reference to Newton's laws,
a. why the 'transferred force', i.e. the force felt through the foam by a goalkeeper
wearing it would be the same as the force needed to decelerate the ball
b. why the lines on the graph show a linear relationship with a positive gradient.
4. In light of the principle of conservation of linear momentum, how can a goalkeeper
remain stationary, whilst the ball's momentum is completely removed in collision with
the leg pads?
Scientific source
As you read the articles,
consider where they have
come from, who wrote
them and whom they were
written for. Established
scientific publications are
good sources of reliable
information, where as
other resources might
be less dependable for
a number of reasons.
Think about what makes a)
source reliable and why,
065503750000000
Activity
Imagine you work for OBO as their UK representative and you have to prepare a presentation to delegates
at a trade show in England. Your presentation will need to explain in much greater scientific detail the
testing that the equipment has undergone in The O Lab. Prepare a questionnaire, for OBO head office in
New Zealand, of questions that will give you the details you need to prepare your presentation.
You do not need to
prepare the presentation
for the trade show,
just your questionnaire
designed to get the
information you need from
OBO head office to be
able to prepare such a
presentation.
Did you know?
OBO use one unusual testing procedure they call the DTH test. This involves a real goalkeeper wearing the item
under test. A ball is fired at the test subject and the lab researchers ask the question, 'Did That Hurt?'
. From the website of OBO, www.obo.co.nz/the-o-lab
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
61
Momentum
2.3
WP
Investigation
Investigating momentum change
motion sensor
Newton's second law of motion
If we consider trying to bring an object to rest or to accelerate
it up to a certain velocity, the requirements will be different for
different situations. A golf ball is accelerated in a very different
way to a ferry. Think of the forces needed and the time for
which they act. This brings us to another way of considering
momentumn. It is a measure of the accelerating force, and the time
it is applied for, that is needed to bring an object up to the speed
it is moving at. Alternatively, it is the force required, and for how
long, to bring a moving object to rest.
laptop
datalogger
[
]
[y]
AXIOMATA
SIVE
LEGES MOTUS
w
akim. Siquis lapide
digits pels premier
je
fig C Measuring how a force changes the momentum of a trolley.
You can investigate the rate of change of momentum in the school
laboratory. If you record the movement of the trolley over time as a
force makes it move from rest, you can find its velocity each second.
If you then calculate the momentum each second, you will be able
to plot a graph of momentum against time. It should be a straight
line. As p = Ft, the gradient of this line will be equal to the
accelerating force.
tum promet paflim alert. Sicorpiquod in.cara
demque cim in motu proprio and mustan
lemons, (lilor in corristande impedire Mc
e qualitet mutantur, funt corporibus reciproca proportion
mens niet molt mal ab
mandatur. Mom
P
orno
Si cerpes dato tempore, viola M
ferretur ab E, N, sh
# ad
c lear priklopa
men DC, vi utrac lacur
dem tempore ab . Nam
Momentum
Ferda fark. Ex like me
arm in cam
per plagam
dan lempore ad eam
live vs Nimi
LE
TIL
Time
fig B Newton's laws of motion as he originally wrote them.
fig D Accelerating from rest, momentum will be proportional to time.
Questions
Newton's second law can be written mathematically as F= ma.
In fact, that formula only holds true if the mass remains constant.
When Newton originally wrote his second law in the 1687 book,
Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, he actually wrote it as:
The rate of change of momentum of a body is directly proportional
to the resultant force applied to the body, and is in the same direction
as the force.
This can be written mathematically as:
dp d(mv)
Fdt dt
dp
Here, Fis the applied force, and is the rate of change of
dt
momentum in the direction of the force.
The term is a mathematical expression meaning the rate of
change of x, or how quickly x changes. However, if the quantities
are not being measured over a very short timescale, we can
express this using average changes:
Calculate the momentum in each of these examples:
(a) an ice skater with a mass of 64 kg glides at 3.75 m 5-1
(b) a rugby player of mass 120 kg runs at a speed of 4.9 ms1
(c) an ant of mass 5 milligrams moves at a speed of 5 centimetres
per second.
Estimate the momentum of the motorcyclist and the skateboarder
shown in fig A.
Using the ideas of Newton's second law, explain why hitting an
airbag will cause less injury than if a passenger hits the dashboard.
4 Estimate the force applied by a person throwing a Frisbee.
At
Kev definition
Momentum (kgms ) = mass (kg) velocity (ms)
p = mxv
55
2.3
Conservation of linear momentum
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain the principle of conservation of linear momentum
• make calculations based on the conservation of linear momentum
Collisions
When objects collide, we can use the laws of physics to calculate where the objects will go after the
collision. We can use the principle of conservation of linear momentum to predict the motion
of objects after a collision. This principle tells us that if we calculate the momentum of each object
before they collide, the sum total of these momenta (accounting for their direction) will be the same
as the sum total afterwards.
Learning tip
The word 'linear' appears here to remind us that this is all about objects moving in straight lines. There are
similar physics principles about rotating objects, but they use different equations for the calculations. In
this book we will only consider linear momentum.
fig A Newton's cradle: each time
the balls collide, momentum
is transferred from one
to another, but the total
momentum remains constant.
This principle is dependent on the condition that no external force acts on the objects in question.
An external force would provide an additional acceleration, and the motion of the objects would not
be dependent on the collision alone. As we saw in the previous section, a resultant force will cause a
change in momentum, so it makes sense that momentum is only conserved if no external force acts.
Imagine if a juggler's upward moving ball collided with one coming down. Momentum conservation
would suggest that the one falling down would bounce back with an upward velocity after the
collision. Common sense tells us that all balls will still end up back on the ground. The external force
of gravity means that the principle of conservation of momentum alone cannot be used to predict
the motions after the collision.
19
fig B David Porter of the TCU Horned Frogs feels the full force of the conservation of momentum.
56
2.3
Exam-style questions
1 Which of the following is the correct unit for momentum?
(a) kgs-
(b) kgms!
(c) kgms?
(d) kg m-5-1
[1]
[Total: 1]
5 A student is using a 'Newton's Cradle'. This consists of a set of
identical solid metal balls hanging by threads from a frame so
that they are in contact with each other.
She initially pulls one ball to the side as shown.
2 A hockey ball of mass 158 g is hit with a force of 2000 N so
that it travels at 28.1 ms 1. What is the ball's momentum?
(a) 4.4kgms!
(b) 62.4kgm s-2
(c) 4440 kg m-15-1
(d) 8880 kg msi
[1]
[Total: 1]
[4]
3 An ice dance couple begin their routine stationary and push
apart from each other with a force of 75 N on the other. The
female skater has a mass of 64 kg, whilst the male skater
weighs 804N
If the female moves off to the left with a speed of 3.6 msi,
what is the velocity of the male skater?
(a) 0.022 ms-l to the right
(b) 2.8ms to the right
(c) 3.1 ms to the left
(d) 3.1ms to the right
[Total: 1]
She releases the ball, it collides with the nearest stationary ball
and stops. The ball furthest to the right immediately moves
away. The middle three balls remain stationary.
(a) Explain what measurements the student would take and
describe how she would use them to investigate whether
momentum had been conserved in this event.
(b) The student makes the following observations:
• the ball on the right returns and collides with a similar
result; this repeats itself a number of times
• after a while, the middle balls are also moving
• shortly afterwards, the balls all come to rest.
Discuss these observations in terms of energy. [3]
[Total: 7]
[1]
4 How tiny bacteria move is of interest in nanotechnology.
Mycobacteria move by ejecting slime from nozzles in their
bodies.
Explain the physics principles behind this form of propulsion.
[Total: 4]
62
2.3
WORKED EXAMPLE
If the boy has a mass of 55 kg and steps forward at a speed
of 1.5 ms, what will happen to the boat which has a mass
of 36 kg? (Ignore friction effects.)
This situation is an explosion, so:
total momentum before = total momentum after = zero
:: Pboat + Pboy = 0
- Pboat = -Pboy
So when the two are added up, the total momentum is
still zero.
Pboat = -(55 x 1.5) = -82.5 kgm s-1
mboat * Vboat = -82.5 kg m s -1
-82.5 -82.5
Vboat moat
36
Vboat = -2.3 ms-
fig D Caution: explosions may make
you wet!
So the boat moves at 2.3 ms in the opposite direction to the boy.
WP
Investigation
Investigating transfer of momentum
fig E Verifying the principle of conservation of linear momentum.
You can investigate the transfer of momentum in collisions in the school laboratory using trolleys, or
sliders on an airtrack. By recording the movement of one trolley crashing into another, you can find the
momentum of each one before and after the collision. The calculation of summing the total momenta
before and after collision will allow you to verify the principle of conservation of linear momentum. Try
different types of collision and trolleys with different masses. You could also try an explosion in which the
trolleys spring apart from a stationary position.
In experiments using trolleys, we often find that momentum is actually not conserved in the measurements
we make. With air track collisions, the measurements match very closely or exactly with the conservation
of momentum theory. What might be the reasons for this difference between the two types of experiment?
fig F A trolley 'explosion'.
58
Exam-style questions
2.3
6 A student used a motion sensor and a datalogging computer
to investigate the momentum changes when a trolley is
accelerated by a falling weight connected to it. Assume the
trolley suffers no friction on the desk, and there is also no
friction in the pulley wheel.
motion sensor
7 Explain how the principle of conservation of momentum
in collisions is a consequence of Newton's third law of
motion.
[6]
[Total: 6]
8 A hockey ball is travelling horizontally with a momentum of
0.8 kgm s-) just before it hits a goalkeeper's leg pad. It
rebounds horizontally from the leg pad with a momentum of
-1.2 kg ms-1. The graph shows the variation in the momentum
of the ball during this process.
-
laptop
datalogger
Momentumn/kgm si
Time/ms
(a) Explain how Newton's second law of motion predicts the
momentum of this trolley will change when the weight is
allowed to fall freely
[2]
(b) When the weight is released, trolley experiences a resultant
accelerating force of 2.85 N and has a mass of 350 g.
Calculate the rate of change of velocity of the trolley. [3]
(c) The trolley reaches a velocity of 11.1ms-l, calculate its
momentum at this velocity, including the correct unit. [2]
Explain what is meant by the principle of conservation of
momentum.
[2]
The student changes the experiment so that she can collide a
moving trolley with an identical stationary one.
(a) Describe how the ball's momentum changes over time from
0 to 10 ms.
[3]
(b) Explain in terms of Newton's laws why the momentum
changes from positive to negative during the ball's collision
with the leg pad.
[2]
(c) What is the resultant force on the ball during the following
time periods?
(i) 0-4ms
(ii) 4-8ms
(iii) 8–12 ms
[4]
(d) Draw a new version of the graph for a collision in which the
ball is initially travelling at half the speed, and for which the
impact time is also halved, but the force provided by the leg
pads is the same.
[3]
[Total: 12]
(e) Explain the momentum and speed changes for each trolley
if the moving trolley stops on collision, and the stationary
one moves away.
(f) Explain the momentum and speed changes involved if the
trolleys join together on collision, and both move away
together.
(g) Explain how this experiment could be changed to
investigate the momentum and speed changes in an
explosion
[Total: 20]
[3]
63
Momentum
2.3
WORKED EXAMPLE
In an American football match, the stationary quarterback is tackled by a defender who dives through
the air at 4 ms and, in mid-air, grabs the quarterback and the two fly backwards together. Ignoring
any friction effects, calculate how fast the two will fly back if the tackler has a mass of 140 kg and the
stationary player has a mass of 95 kg. Consider the entire situation to be happening horizontally.
Before:
Quarterback stationary so zero momentum
Ptackler = mv = 140 x 4 = 560
momentum before = 560 kg ml
After:
momentum after = momentum before = 560 kg msl
Pboth = m both * Vboth
Pboth 560 560
both moth (140 +95) 235
Vboth = 2.4 ms
Learning tip
In a collision in which two objects join together to become one and move off together, they are often
said to 'coalesce'
Explosions
fig C In this photo, these trapeze artists are stationary. If they let go of each other, they will 'explode' - they will fly apart
with equal and opposite momenta.
If a stationary object explodes, then the total momentum of all the shrapnel parts added up (taking
account of the direction of their movements) must be zero. The object had zero momentum at the
start, so the law of conservation of linear momentum tells us this must be the same total after the
explosion. In physics terms, any such event is termed an explosion, although it may not be very
dramatic. For example, if the two trapeze artists in fig C simply let go their hands and swing apart,
they have zero total momentum before and will have equal and opposite momenta afterwards, which
when added together will total zero again.
