Motion
2.1
WP
Investigation
Newton's second law investigation
data logger
laptop
Acceleration/ms-2
card
light
gate
light
gate
0.8
1.0
1.8
2.0
1.2 1.4 1.6
1/mass/kg-
trolley in motion
fig E Graph of results from the second investigation into Newton's second law.
The x-axis represents the derived data of 1/mass', so the straight best-fit line
shows that acceleration is inversely proportional to mass. Note that there
is no need for a graph to start at the origin: choose axes scales that will best
show the pattern in the data by making the points fill the graph paper.
fig C Experimental set-up for investigating the relationship between F, m and a
Experimental verification of Newton's second law is well
established. The investigation shown in fig C demonstrates that:
a-m
You can use the set-up shown in fig C, or a similar experiment on an
air track, to measure the acceleration for various values of the
resultant force acting on the trolley whilst you keep its mass constant
(table A). By plotting a graph of acceleration against resultant force,
a straight line will show that acceleration is proportional to the
resultant force. You could also plot a graph for varying masses of
trolley whilst you keep the resultant force constant (table B).
Force/N Acceleration/ms-2
0.1
0.20
0.2
|
0.40
0.3
L 0.60
0.4
L
0.80
0.5
1.00
1.20
table A Values of acceleration for different forces acting on a trolley.
0.6
Learning tip
Straight-line graphs
Physicists are always trying to arrange their experimental data into
graphs that produce a straight best-fit line. This proves a linear
relationship between the experimental variables, and can also give
us numerical information about the quantities involved.
The equation for a straight line is:
y = mx + c
'm' in the equation is the gradient of the straight line, and '' is the
value on the y-axis where the line crosses it, known as the y-intercept.
If we plot experimental data on a graph and get a straight best-fit
line, then this proves the quantities we plotted on x and y have a
linear relationship. It is referred to as 'directly proportional' (or
simply 'proportional') only if the line also passes through the origin,
meaning that c = 0.
The graphs in fig D and fig E demonstrate experimental verification
of Newton's second law. In each case, the third variable in the
equation was kept constant as a control variable. For example, in
fig D the straight best-fit line, showing that yox, proves that a F.
and the gradient of the best-fit line would represent the reciprocal of
the mass that was accelerated and was kept constant throughout, as
a control variable. In this example c = 0, which means that the
proportional relationships are simple:
y = mx
Mass/kg
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Acceleration/m 5-2
1.00
0.83
0.71
0.63
0.55
0.50
1.0
table B Values of acceleration resulting from an applied force of 0.5 N
when the mass of the trolley is varied.
Acceleration/ms-2
As both the above equations represent the graph in fig D, it follows
that the gradient, m, equals the reciprocal of the mass, 1/m. It is just
coincidence that the symbol 'm' for gradient, and 'm' for mass are the
same letter in this example.
Note that graphs in physics are causal relationships. In fig D, the
acceleration is caused by the force. It is very rare in physics that a graph
would represent a statistical correlation, and so phrases such as 'positive
correlation' do not correctly describe graphs of physics experiments.
Similarly, it is very rare that a graph of a physics experiment would
be correctly drawn if the points are joined 'dot-to-dot'. In most cases
a best-fit line should be drawn, as has been done in fig E.
0 01 02 03 04 05 0.6
Force/N
fig D Graph of results from the first investigation into Newton's
second law. Acceleration is directly proportional to force.
2.1
Newton's third law of motion
"When an object A causes a force on another object B, then object B causes an equal force in the
opposite direction to act upon object A'. For example, when a skateboarder pushes off from a
wall, they exert a force on the wall with their hand. At the same time, the wall exerts a force on the
skateboarder's hand. This equal and opposite reaction force is what they can feel with the sense of
touch, and as the skateboard has very low friction, the wall's push on them causes acceleration away
from the wall. As the wall is connected to the Earth, the Earth and wall combination will accelerate in
the opposite direction. The Earth has such a large mass that its acceleration is imperceptible. That's
Newton's second law again: acceleration is inversely proportional to mass; huge mass means tiny
acceleration
Learning tip
Identifying Newton's third law of force pairs can confuse people. To find the two forces, remember they
must always act on different objects, and must always have the same cause. In fig F, it is the mutual
repulsion of electrons in the atoms of the football and the boot that cause the action and reaction.
Questions
fig F When the boot puts a force on
the football, the football causes
an equal and opposite force
on the boot. The footballer can
feel the kick because they feel
the reaction force from the ball
on their toe.
In terms of Newton's laws of motion:
(a) Explain why this book will sit stationary on a table.
(b) Describe and explain what will happen if your hands then put an upwards force on the book that is
greater than its weight.
(c) Explain why you feel the book when your hands put that upwards force on it.
2
(a) Calculate the gradient of the best-fit line on the graph in fig D and thus work out the mass of the
trolley that was accelerated in the first investigation.
(b) State what quantity the gradient of the line on the graph in fig E represents. Calculate the value of that
quantity
3
Calculate the acceleration in each of the following cases:
(a) A mass of 12.0 kg experiences a resultant force of 785 N.
(b) A force of 22.2 N acts on a 3.1 kg mass.
(c) A 2.0 kg bunch of bananas is dropped. The bunch weighs 19.6 N.
(d) During a tackle, two footballers kick a stationary ball at the same time, with forces acting in
opposite directions. One kick has a force of 210 N, the other has a force of 287 N. The mass of the
football is 430 g.
Key definitions
Newton's first law of motion:
An object will remain at rest, or in a state of uniform motion, until acted upon by a resultant force.
Newton's second law of motion:
If an object's mass is constant, the resultant force needed to cause an acceleration is given by the equation:
EF = ma
Newton's third law of motion:
For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
28
TOPIC 2
Mechanics
12.1 Motion
CHAPTER
Introduction
How could we calculate how fast a plane is flying, in what direction it is going and how long it will
take to reach a certain destination? If you were a pilot, how would you know what force to make
the engines produce and where to direct that force so your plane moves to your destination?
There is an amazing number of calculations that need to be done to enable a successful flight, but the basis
on which all of it is worked out is simple mechanics.
This chapter explains the multiple movements of objects. It looks at how movement can be described and
recorded, and then moves on to explaining why movement happens. It covers velocity and acceleration,
including how to calculate these in different situations.
We only consider objects moving at speeds that could be encountered in everyday life. At these speeds
(much less than the speed of light) Sir Isaac Newton succinctly described three laws of motion. With
knowledge of basic geometry, we can identify aspects of movement in each dimension.
Newton's laws of motion have been constantly under test by scientists ever since he published them in
1687. Within the constraints established by Einstein in the early twentieth century, Newton's laws have
always correctly described the relationships between data collected. You may have a chance to confirm
Newton's laws in experiments of your own. With modern ICT recording of data, the reliability of such
experiments is now much improved over traditional methods.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the newton, N)
• Using Pythagoras' theorem, and the angle sum of a triangle (e.g. finding a resultant vector)
• Using sin, cos and tan in physical problems (e.g. resolving vectors)
• Using angles in regular 2D structures (e.g. interpreting force diagrams to solve problems)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. re-arranging the SUVAT equations)
• Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. calculating the acceleration)
Plotting two variables from experimental or other data, understanding that y = mx + c represents a
linear relationship and determining the slope of a linear graph (e.g. verifying Newton's second law
experimentally)
Estimating, by graphical methods as appropriate, the area between a curve and the x-axis and realising
the physical significance of the area that has been determined (e.g. using a speed-time graph)
14.
2.1
Combining equations
We can combine the equations
V = u + at
and
(u + V) .
2
By substituting the first of these equations into the second, we get the combination equation:
(u + (u + at)) (2ut + ata)
so 2
s = ut + at?
We can use this equation to check again how high the stone was dropped from:
• falling under gravity, so a = g = 9.81 ms-2
• starts at rest, so u=0ms-1
• time to fall r = 3s
S = ut + at = (0 x 3) + ( x 9.81 x 32) = 44.1
S = 44.1 m
Notice that the answer must come out the same, as we are calculating for the same cliff. This highlights
the fact that we can use whichever equation is most appropriate for the information given.
Combining equations another way
fig B Calculations about falling
objects are very common.
S=
2
t=
2s
(u + v)
and v= u + at
By substituting the first of these equations into the second, we get the combination equation:
(u + v)
. v(u + v) = u(u + v) + 2as
i vu + v2 = x2 + UV + 2as vu = uv so subtract from each side
v=u2 + 2as
Check again what the stone's final velocity would be:
• falling under gravity, so a = g = 9.81 ms-2
• starts at rest, so u = Oms-1
• height to fall s = 44.1 m
v2 = u? + 2as = 02 + (2 x 9.81 x 44.1) = 865
V = 865 = 29.4
V = 29.4 ms -1
Notice that the answer must come out the same as previously calculated, and this again highlights
that there are many routes to reach the answer.
SUVAT equation
V = u + at
(u + V)
Quantity not used
distance
S=
2
acceleration
S = ut + -at
final velocity
v2 = u2 + 2as
time
table A Each of the SUVAT equations is useful, depending on the information we are given. If you know three
quantities, you can always find a fourth by identifying which equation links those four quantities and re-
arranging that equation to find the unknown.
30
2.1
Velocity and acceleration
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain the distinction between scalar and vector quantities
distinguish between speed and velocity and define acceleration
calculate values using equations for velocity and acceleration
Movement is fundamental to the functioning of our universe. Whether you are running to catch a
bus or want to calculate the speed needed for a rocket to travel to Mars or the kinetic energy of an
electron in an X-ray machine, you need to be able to work out how fast things are moving.
ILottery
THOMAS
Rate of movement
One of the simplest things we can measure is how fast an object is moving. You can calculate an
object's speed if you know the amount of time taken to move a certain distance:
speed (m 5-1) - distance (m)
time (s)
V
fig A Charlene Thomas has
accelerated to a high speed.
However, the calculation for speed will only tell you how fast an object is moving. Often it is also
vitally important to know in what direction this movement is taking the object. When you include
the direction in the information about the rate of movement of an object, this is then known as the
velocity. So, the velocity is the rate of change of displacement, where the distance in a particular
direction is called the 'displacement'.
displacement (m)
velocity (ms) =
time (s)
V = ?
OR
1
300 m
Learning tip
The upper case symbol for the
Greek letter delta, 4, is used
mathematically to mean a
change in a quantity. For
example, As means the change
in the displacement of an
object, to be used here to
calculate its velocity.
75m
fig B The displacement due north is only 75 m, whilst the actual distance this athlete has run is 300 m.
So the velocity due north is much less than the actual speed.
Scalars and vectors
A quantity for which the direction must be stated is known as a vector. If direction is not important,
the measurement is referred to as a scalar quantity. Therefore, velocity is a vector and speed is a
scalar, distance is a scalar and displacement is a vector.
Scalar and vector quantities are not limited to measurements related to movement. Every measured
quantity can be classified as needing to include the direction (vector, e.g. force) or as being
sufficiently stated by its magnitude only (scalar, e.g. mass).
16
What have I studied before?
• Using a stopwatch to measure times
Measuring and calculating the speed of objects
Gravity making things fall down, and giving
them weight
• Measuring forces, calculating resultant forces
The motion of objects as a result of forces acting
on them
What will I study later?
• Kinetic energy and gravitational potential energy
Interconverting gravitational potential and kinetic
energy
Work and power
Momentum and the principle of conservation
of momentum
• Wave movements
• Fluid movements and terminal velocity
The meaning and calculation of impulse (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
• The definitions of and equations for speed,
distance, displacement, time, velocity.
acceleration
Graphs of motion over time
• The classification of scalars and vectors
Adding and resolving vectors
• Newton's laws of motion
Kinematics equations
. Moments (turning forces)
15
2.1
Kinematics equations
Each equation uses four of the variables, which means that if we
know the values of any three variables, we can find out the other two.
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• recall the simple kinematics equations
• calculate unknown variables using the kinematics equations
Kinematics is the study of the movement of objects. We can use
equations, commonly known as the SUVAT equations, to find out
details about the motion of objects accelerating in one dimension.
Acceleration redefined
By re-arranging the equation that defined acceleration, we come
to the usual expression of the first SUVAT equation:
v=u + at
For example, if a stone is dropped off a cliff (see fig B) and takes
three seconds to hit the ground, what is its speed when it does hit
the ground?
Identify the three things we know:
• falling under gravity, so a = g = 9.81 ms 2
(constant acceleration, so SUVAT can be used)
starts at rest, so u= Oms-1
time to fall t = 3s
V = u + at = 0 + 9.81 x 3 = 29.43
V = 29.4 ms
fig A kinematics is the study of the description of the motion of objects. The
equations could be used to make calculations about the stone falling
through the air, and separately about its motion through the water. The
acceleration in air and in water will be different as the resultant force
acting in each will be different.
Learning tip
Often the acceleration will not be explicitly stated, but the object is
falling under gravity, so:
a = g = 9.81 m 5-2
Learning tip
Often the initial velocity will not be explicitly stated, but the object
starts 'at rest'. This means it is stationary at the beginning, so:
u = Oms
Zero acceleration
If an object has no resultant force acting on it then it does not
accelerate. This is uniform motion. In this situation, calculations
on its motion are very easy, as they simply involve the basic speed
equation:
VES
The velocity is the same at the beginning and end of the motion,
and if we need to find the displacement travelled, it is a simple
case of multiplying velocity by time:
S = V Xt
Distance from average speed
As SUVAT only works with uniform acceleration, the average
speed during any acceleration will be halfway from the initial
velocity to the final velocity. Therefore the distance travelled is the
average speed multiplied by the time:
(u + V)
-
Constant acceleration
There are equations that allow us to work out the motion of an
object that is moving with a constant acceleration. They are often
called the SUVAT equations because of the variables involved,
and the first step is to define those five variables:
s-displacement (m)
u-initial velocity (ms-')
V-final velocity (ms)
a- acceleration (ms-2)
t-time (s)
For example, for the same stone dropping off the cliff as in the
previous example, we could work out how high the cliff is.
Identify the three things we know:
• final velocity came to be v = 29.4 ms-1
• starts at rest, so u = Oms-1
time to fall t = 3s
(u + v) (0 + 29.4)
-X 3 = 44.1
xt =
S = 44.1 m
Motion
2.1
centre of gravity,
centre of gravity
HOE
fig F Balancing a broom on its centre of gravity.
fig G Finding the centre of gravity of an irregular rod (broom).
Investigation
Finding the centre of mass of an irregular rod
In this investigation, we use the principle of moments to find the centre of gravity of a broom. As it is not a
symmetrical object, the location of the centre of gravity is not easy to determine just by looking at the
broom. With the extra mass at the brush head end, the centre of gravity will be nearer that end.
If you can balance the broom on a knife edge, then the centre of gravity must lie above the knife edge.
As the perpendicular distance from the line of action to the weight is zero, the moment is zero so the
broom sits in equilibrium.
You will probably find it difficult to balance the broom exactly, so you can use an alternative method. First
you measure the mass of the broom (M) using a digital balance. Then you use a set of hanging masses (of
mass m) to balance the broom more in the middle of the handle, as in fig G. When the broom is balanced,
you measure the distance (d) from the hanging masses to the pivot). You calculate the distance (x) from
the pivot to the centre of gravity of the broom using the principle of moments:
clockwise moment = anticlockwise moment
mg xd = Mg x x
md
M
Note: Do not get into the habit of using only the mass in moments calculations, as the definition is force
times distance. It just happens that in this case g cancels on each side.
Questions
| What is the moment of a 252 N force acting on a solid object at a perpendicular distance of 1.74 m from
an axis of rotation of the object?
2
A child and her father are playing on a seesaw. They are exactly balanced when the girl (mass 46 kg) sits at
the end of the seesaw, 2.75 m from the pivot. If her father weighs 824 N, how far is he from the pivot?
The weight of the exercise book in the left-hand picture in fig B causes a rotation so it moves towards the
second position. Explain why it does not continue rotating but comes to rest in the position of the second
picture.
4
If the same set-up as shown in fig D was used again, but the toy car was replaced with a banana weighing
1.4 N, find out where the banana would have to be positioned for the beam to balance - calculate the
new X3.
Key definitions
A body is in equilibrium if there is zero resultant force and zero resultant moment. It will have zero
acceleration.
The principle of moments states that a body will be in equilibrium if the sum of clockwise moments
acting on it is equal to the sum of the anticlockwise moments.
An object's centre of gravity is the point through which the weight of an object appears to act.
Motion
2.1
For example, the first 15 minutes of the boating trip in fig A
represents a time of 900 seconds. In this time, the boat travelled
150 m. Its velocity is:
As 150
= 0.167 ms' upriver
For example, between 15 and 20 minutes on the graphs, the boat
slows evenly to a stop. The acceleration here can be calculated as
the gradient:
ant - Av - V-U_0 -0.167 _ -0.167.
gradient =
= -0.0006 ms 2
5 x 60 300
So the acceleration is: a = -0.6 x 10-?ms?
V= At 900
Distance travelled from v-t graphs
Speed is defined as the rate of change in distance:
Velocity-time graphs
A velocity-time graph will show the velocity of an object over
time. We calculated that the velocity of the boat on the river was
0.167ms- upriver for the first 15 minutes of the journey. Looking
at the graph in fig B, you can see that the line is constant at
+0.167 ms-l for the first 15 minutes.
...
d=vxt
Also notice that the velocity axis includes negative values, so that
the difference between travelling upriver (positive y-axis values)
and downriver (negative y-axis values) can be represented.
As the axes on the v-t graph represent velocity and time, an area
on the graph represents the multiplication of velocity x time,
which gives distance. So to find the distance travelled from a v-
graph, find the area between the line and the x-axis.
Velocity/ms
Velocity/ms!
0.2
Time
0.0
1
10
20
30
40
50
60
/minutes
0.01
10
20
Time
/minutes
| 30
40
50
60
0.1
-0.1
-02
-0.2
fig B Velocity-time graph of the boating trip.
fig C In the first 15 minutes (900 seconds) the distance travelled by the boat
moving at 0.167 ms" is given by the area between the line and the x-
axis: d = V X t = 0.167 x 900 = 150m.
Acceleration from v-t graphs
Acceleration is defined as the rate of change in velocity.
In order to calculate the gradient of the line on a v-t graph,
we must divide a change in velocity by the corresponding
time difference. This exactly matches with the equation for
acceleration:
If we are only interested in finding the distance moved, this also
works for a negative velocity. You find the area from the line up to
the time axis. This idea will still work for a changing velocity. Find
the area under the line and you have found the distance travelled.
For example, from 0 to 20 minutes, the area under the line, all the
way down to the x-axis, is a trapezium, so we need to find that
area. To calculate the whole distance travelled in the journey for
the first 40 minutes, we would have to find the areas under the
four separate stages (0–15 minutes: 15–20 minutes, 20–25
minutes, and 25-40 minutes) and then add these four answers
together.
gradient = Ax=174= acceleration
Questions
1 Describe in as much detail as you can, including calculated values,
what happens in the bicycle journey shown on the d-t graph
in fig F.
Investigation
Finding the acceleration due to
gravity by multiflash photography
Using a multiflash photography
technique, or a video recording that
can be played back frame by frame,
we can observe the falling motion of
a small object such as a marble. We
need to know the time between
frames.
From each image of the falling
object, measure the distance it has
fallen from the scale in the picture.
A carefully drawn distance-time
graph will show a curve as the
object accelerates. From this curve,
take regular measurements of the
gradient by drawing tangents to the fig D Multiflash photography
curve. These gradients show the
allows us to capture the
instantaneous speed at each point accelerating movement of an
on the curve.
object falling under gravity.
Plotting these speeds on a velocity-time graph should show a straight
line, as the acceleration due to gravity is a constant value. The gradient
of the line on this v-t graph will be the acceleration due to gravity.g.
Distance/m
Bc
40
do 10 20 30
Time/s
fig F Distance-time graph of a bike journey.
2 Describe in as much detail as you can, including calculated values,
what happens in the car journey shown on the v-t graph in fig G.
Speed ms-
Acceleration-time graphs
These graphs show how the acceleration of an object changes
over time. In many instances the acceleration is zero or a constant
value, in which case an acceleration-time (a=) graph is likely to
be of relatively little interest. For example, the object falling in
our investigation above will be accelerated by gravity throughout.
Assuming it is relatively small, air resistance will be negligible, and
the a-t graph of its motion would be a horizontal line at
a= -9.81 ms? Compare this with your results to see how
realistic it is to ignore air resistance.
For a larger object falling for a long period, such as a skydiver,
then the acceleration will change over time as the air resistance
increases with speed. The weight of a skydiver is constant, so
the resultant force will be decreasing throughout, meaning that
the acceleration will also reduce (see Section 1.1.5). The curve
would look like that in fig E.
A B C D
"O 10 20 30 40 50
Time/s
fig G Velocity-time graph of a car journey.
3
From fig B, calculate the distance travelled by the boat from
40 to 60 minutes.
a/ms-2
5
10
15
20
25
30 t/s
Learning tip
Remember that the gradient of a distance-time graph represents
speed or velocity, so if the line is curved, the changing gradient
indicates a changing speed, which you can describe as the same as
the changes in gradient.
Kev definitions
A displacement-time graph is a graph showing the positions visited
on a journey, with displacement on the y-axis and time on the x-axis.
A velocity-time graph is a graph showing the velocities on a
journey, with velocity on the y-axis and time on the x-axis.
fig E Acceleration-time graph for a skydiver.
See Section 4.1.4 for more details on falling objects and terminal
velocity.
20
2.1
Newton's laws of motion
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
recall Newton's laws of motion and use them to explain the acceleration of objects
• make calculations using Newton's second law of motion
• identify pairs of forces involved in Newton's third law of motion
WP
Sir Isaac Newton was an exceptional thinker and scientist. His influence over science in the West
is still enormous, despite the fact that he lived from 1642 to 1727. Probably his most famous
contribution to science was the development of three simple laws governing the movement of
objects subject to forces.
fig A Isaac Newton was an MP and Master of the Royal Mint in addition to being a professor at Cambridge University
and President of the Royal Society. He is buried in Westminster Abbey.
Newton's first law of motion
If an object is stationary there needs to be a resultant force on it to make it move. We saw how to
calculate resultant forces in Section 2.1.3. If the object is already moving then it will continue at the
same speed in the same direction unless a resultant force acts on it. If there is no resultant force on
an object - either because there is zero force acting or all the forces balance out - then the object's
motion is unaffected.
Newton's second law of motion
This law tells us how much an object's motion will be changed by a resultant force. For an object with
constant mass, it is usually written mathematically
F = ma
resultant force (N) = mass (kg) x acceleration (ms)
For example, this relationship allows us to calculate the acceleration due to gravity (g) if we measure
the force (F) accelerating a mass (m) downwards.
F=ma = mg
fig B A stationary object will not
move unless it is acted upon
by a resultant force.
26
2.1
2
Motion graphs
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
The simplest thing we could find from these graphs is how far
an object has moved in a certain time. For example, in fig A,
interpret displacement-time graphs, velocity-time graphs
both the graphs show that in the first 15 minutes the boat moved
and acceleration-time graphs
150 m. Looking at the time from 40 to 48 minutes, both show that
• make calculations from these graphs
the boat travelled 120 m, but the displacement-time graph is in
the negative region of the y-axis, showing the boat was moving
understand the graphical representations of accelerated motion
downriver from the starting point - the opposite direction to the
places it had been in the first 40 minutes.
During the period from 20 to 25 minutes, both graphs have a flat
One of the best ways to understand the movements of an object
line at a constant value, showing no change in the distance or
whilst on a journey is to plot a graph of the position of the object
displacement. This means the boat was not moving - a flat line on
over time. Such a graph is known as a displacement-time
a distance-time (d-t) graph means the object is stationary. From
graph. A velocity-time graph will also provide detail about the
20 to 25 minutes on the velocity-time (1-1) graph of this journey
movements involved. A velocity-time graph can be produced from
(see fig B) the line would be at a velocity of Oms!
direct measurements of the velocity or generated from calculations
made using the displacement-time graph.
Speed and velocity from d-t graphs
The gradient of the d-t graphs in fig A will tell us how fast the
Displacement-time graphs
boat was moving. Gradient is found from the ratio of changes in
If we imagine a boating trip on a river, we could monitor the the y-axis divided by the corresponding change on the x-axis, so:
location of the boat over the hour that it has been rented for
for a distance-time graph:
and plot the displacement-time graph for these movements.
distance (m)
Depending on what information we want the graph to offer, it is
- = speed (ms)
often simpler to draw a distance-time graph in which the
direction of movement is ignored.
The graphs shown in fig A are examples of plotting position for a displacement-time graph:
against time, and show how a distance-time graph cannot
displacement (m)
decrease with time. A displacement-time graph could have parts
gradient =
= velocity (ms)
time (s)
of it in the negative portions of the y-axis, if the movement went
in the opposite direction at some points in time.
Distance-time graph
Displacement-time graph
Distance
Displacement
/m
2004
gradient=
time (s)
/m
600+
500-
up river
The
10
20
30
40
50
60 1 Time
/minutes
2007
0
10
20
30
40
50
60 Time
/minutes
down river
fig A A comparison of the displacement-time graph of the boating trip up and down a river with its corresponding distance-time graph.
18
2.1
WORKED EXAMPLE
In fig D, we can work out the weight of the beam if we know all the other weights and distances. The
beam is uniform, so its weight will act from its centre. The length of the beam is 100 cm. So if xy = 20 cm,
then x, must be 30 cm, and x2 = 80 cm. The dinosaur (W) weighs 5.8 N and the toy
car's weight (W) is 0.95 N.
In equilibrium, principle of moments:
sum of clockwise moments = sum of anticlockwise moments
Wix= WoXo + W3X2
5.8 x 0.20 = W. x 0.30 +0.95 x 0.80
1.16-(0.76)
..
Wo =
0.30
Wo = 1.3 N
Learning tip
In order to calculate the sum of the moments in either direction, each individual moment must be
calculated first and these individual moments then added together. The weights and/or distances cannot
be added together and this answer used to calculate some sort of combined moment.
Centre of gravity
The weight of an object is caused by the gravitational attraction between the Earth and each particle
contained within the object. The sum of all these tiny weight forces appears to act from a single
point for any object, and this point is called the centre of gravity. For a symmetrical object, we
can calculate the position of its centre of gravity, as it must lie on every line of symmetry. The point
of intersection of all lines of symmetry will be the centre of gravity. Fig E illustrates this with
two-dimensional shapes, but the idea can be extended into three dimensions. For example, the centre
of gravity of a sphere is at the sphere's centre.
There are equal amounts of
centre of gravity
mass each side of this line.
-
-
-
-
-
L
-
-
-
-
-
-
There are equal
amounts of mass
There are equal
each side of this line.
amounts of mass
The centre of gravity of
each side of this line.
a circle is in the middle.
-The centre of gravity
There are equal amounts
is nearer to the base
of mass all around this point.
of the triangle.
fig E The centre of gravity of a symmetrical object lies at the intersection of all lines of symmetry.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Learning tin
You can consider the terms 'centre of gravity' and 'centre of mass' to mean the same thing. They are
identical for objects that are small compared to the size of the Earth.
Irregular objects
The centre of gravity of an irregularly shaped object will still follow the rule that it is the point at
which its weight appears to act on the object. A Bunsen burner, for example, has a heavy base,
and so the centre of gravity is low down near that concentration of mass, as there will be a greater
attraction by the Earth's gravity to this large mass.
2.1
Moments
Principle of moments
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
calculate the moment of a force
apply the principle of moments
find the centre of gravity of an object
Forces on an object could act so that the object does not start to
move along, but instead rotates about a fixed pivot. If the object is
fixed so that it cannot rotate, it will bend.
Moment of a force
pivot point
force F
distance, x
fig C Balanced moments create an equilibrium situation.
If we add up all the forces acting on an object and the resultant
force, accounting for their directions, is zero, then the object will
fig A A force acts on a beam fixed at a point. The moment of a force causes
be in equilibrium. Therefore it will remain stationary or, if it
rotation or, in this case, bending
is already moving, it will carry on moving at the same velocity.
The object could keep a constant velocity, but if the moments
The tendency to cause rotation is called the moment of a force.
on it are not also balanced, it could be made to start rotating.
It is calculated from:
The principle of moments tells us that if the total of all the
moment (Nm) = force (N) X perpendicular distance from the pivot moments trying to turn an object clockwise is equal to the total
to the line of action of the force (m) of all moments trying to turn an object anticlockwise, then it
moment = Fx
will be in rotational equilibrium. This means it will either remain
stationary, or if it is already rotating it will continue at the same
speed in the same direction.
*
-
-
-
-
-
-
centre
of mass
-
-
-
-
centre
axis of of mass
rotation
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
weight F
weight F
fig B The calculation of moment only considers the perpendicular distance
between the line of action of the force and the axis of rotation, through
the pivot point. When free to rotate, a body will turn in the direction of
any net moment.
fig D As the metre-long beam is balanced, the sum of all the clockwise
moments must equal the sum of all the anticlockwise moments.
Motion
2.1
Questions
Learning tin
Vector notation means that vectors are written in bold type to
distinguish them from scalar variables.
The athlete in fig A has taken 36 seconds from the start to reach the
300 m mark as shown. Calculate:
(a) her average speed during this 36 seconds
(b) her average velocity due north during this 36 seconds
(c) her average velocity due east during this 36 seconds.
2
Average and instantaneous speed
In most journeys, it is unlikely that speed will remain constant
throughout. As part of her training programme, the athlete in
fig A wants to keep a record of her speed for all races. From rest,
before the starting gun starts the race, she accelerates to a top
speed. However, the race timing will be made from start to finish,
and so it is most useful to calculate an average speed over the
whole race. Average speed is calculated by dividing the total
distance for a journey by the total time for the journey. Thus it
averages out the slower and faster parts of the journey, and even
includes stops.
Instantaneous speed can be an important quantity, and we will
look at how to measure it in the next topic.
A driver in a car travelling at about 25 mph (40.2 km h-1) sees a cat
run onto the road ahead.
(a) Convert 40.2 kmh-into a speed in ms!
(b) The car travels 16.5 m whilst the driver is reacting to the danger.
What is his reaction time?
(c) The car comes to a stop in 2.5 s. What is its deceleration?
3
An electron in an X-ray machine is accelerated from rest to half the
speed of light in 1.7 x 10-15 s. Calculate:
(a) the speed the electron reaches in ms-
(b) the acceleration the electron experiences.
Learning tip
Whilst accelerations can (very briefly) be extraordinarily high, like
that for the electron in question 3(b), no speed or velocity can ever
be greater than the speed of light, which is 3 x 108ms-'. If you
calculate a speed that is higher than this, check your calculation
again as it must be wrong.
POLICE
SON
Kev definitions
Speed is the rate of change of distance.
distance (m)
speed (ms-1) =
time (s)
Velocity is the rate of change of displacement.
fig C Most speed checks look at instantaneous speed, but CCTV allows police
to monitor average speed over a long distance.
velocity (ms-1) - displacement (m)
time (s)
v
OR v At
Acceleration
Acceleration is defined as the rate of change of velocity.
Therefore, it must include the direction in which the speed is
changing, and so acceleration is a vector quantity. The equation
defining acceleration is:
change in velocity (ms)
acceleration (ms) =
time taken to change the velocity (s)
Displacement is the vector measurement of distance in a certain
direction.
A vector quantity must have both magnitude and direction.
A scalar quantity has only magnitude
Average speed is calculated by dividing the total distance for a
journey by the total time for the journey:
-11 total distance (m)
average speed (ms-1) = =
total time (s)
Instantaneous speed is the speed at any particular instant in time on
a journey, which can be found from the gradient of the tangent to a
distance-time graph (see Section 2.1.2) at that time.
Acceleration is the vector defined as the rate of change of velocity.
change in velocity (ms-')
acceleration (m 5-2)=-
time taken to change the velocity (s)
a="" OR a = 42
OR
a - Av
where u is the initial velocity and v is the final velocity.
The vector nature of acceleration is very important. One of the
consequences is that if an object changes only the direction of
its velocity, it is accelerating, whilst remaining at a constant speed.
Similarly, deceleration represents a negative change in velocity
and so could be quoted as a negative acceleration.
2.
18
Projectiles
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
apply kinematics equations to moving objects
apply the independence of horizontal and vertical motion to
objects moving freely under gravity
combine horizontal and vertical motion to calculate the
movements of projectiles
60m
Objects thrown or fired through the air generally follow projectile
motion. Here we are going to combine ideas from the various
earlier sections in order to solve in-depth questions about
projectiles. Resolving vectors showed that the actions in each of
two perpendicular directions are wholly independent. This means
we can use Newton's laws of motion and the SUVAT equations
separately for the horizontal and vertical motions of the same object.
This will allow us to calculate its overall motion in two dimensions.
Learning tip
Vectors acting at right angles to each other act independently. Their
combined effect can be calculated using vector addition, but they
can also be considered to act separately and at the same time. This
would cause independent effects, which themselves could then be
combined to see an overall effect.
fig A Vertical acceleration on a horizontally moving stone.
The time to hit the beach, 1, will be the same as if the stone was
simply dropped. We know u = Oms; a = -9.81ms-2; and the
height fallen, s= -60 m.
s = ut + at?
U = 0.. ut = 0
. S = jat?
t=2s
(2 x-60)
Learning tip
Physics is holistic: you can apply ideas from one area of physics to
others. Remember, it is a set of rules that explains everything in the
Universe, so each rule must be applicable to all things.
. tava 1 -9.81
t = 3.5 s
Horizontally, there is no accelerating force once the stone is
in flight, so it has a constant speed. Thus, to find the distance
travelled horizontally, d:
We only consider the motion after the force projecting an object has
finished -for example, after a cannonball has left the cannon. Air
resistance is ignored in these calculations, so the only force acting will
be the object's weight. Thus, all vertical motion will follow SUVAT
equations, with gravity as the acceleration. There will be no horizontal
force at all, which means no acceleration and therefore y=s/t.
d = v Xt
d = 8.2 x 3.5
d = 28.7 m
Recombining velocity components
In the example of the stone kicked from the cliff to the beach,
we might also want to calculate the final velocity of the stone on
landing. This means adding vertical and horizontal components
into their resultant.
Vhorizontal = 8.2 m s -1
-
-
-
Horizontal throws
If an object is projected horizontally, it will start off with zero
vertical velocity. However, gravity will act on it so that its motion
will curve downwards in a parabola shape, like the stone in fig A.
In the example of fig A, a stone is kicked horizontally off a cliff
with a velocity of 8.2 ms ! How much time is the stone in flight?
How far does it get away from the cliff by the time it lands?
Horizontal and vertical motions are totally independent. Here
the vertical component of velocity is initially zero, but the stone
accelerates under gravity. Uniform acceleration means SUVAT
can be used.
wwwwww
-
-
-
-
vertical
-
-
-
wwwwwwwwww
-
-
-
-
-
-
fig B The stone's final velocity is the resultant of its vertical and horizontal
components
34
2.1
The parallelogram rule
There is another method for finding the resultant of two non-perpendicular forces (or vectors) by
scale drawing, which can be easier to use. This is called the parallelogram rule. Draw the two vectors
to scale - at the correct angle and scaled so their length represents the magnitude - starting from
the same point. Then draw the same two vectors again parallel to the original ones, so that they form
a parallelogram, as shown in fig F. The resultant force (or vector) will be the diagonal across the
parallelogram from the starting point.
Hypotenuse
400N
390
450N
fig F Finding the resultant vector using the parallelogram rule.
Learning tip
The vector addition rules shown on these pages work for all vectors, not just forces. They are useful only
for co-planar vectors, which means vectors that are in the same plane. If we have more than two vectors
that are in more than one plane, add two vectors together first, in their plane, and then add the resultant
to the next force using these rules again. Keep doing this until all the vectors have been added in.
70N
Free-body force diagrams
If we clarify what forces are acting on an object, it can be simpler to calculate how it will move. To do
this, we usually draw a free-body force diagram, which has the object isolated, and all the forces that
act on it drawn in at the points where they act. Forces acting on other objects, and those other objects,
are not drawn. For example, fig G could be said to be a free-body force diagram of the rugby player
being tackled in fig B, and this would lead us to draw fig C and fig D to make our resultant calculations.
110N
fig G Free-body force diagram of a
rugby player (red circle). The
forces from the tacklers are
marked on as force arrows.
Questions
| Work out the resultant force on a toy car if it has the following forces acting on it:
• rubber band motor driving forwards 8.4 N
air resistance 0.5 N
• friction 5.8 N
• child's hand pushing forward 10 N.
As a small plane takes off, the lift force on it is 6000 N vertically upwards, whilst the thrust is 2800 N
horizontally forwards. What is the resultant of these forces on the plane?
3 Draw a free-body force diagram of yourself sitting on your chair.
4 (a) Draw the scale diagram of fig E, and work out what the resultant force would be.
(b) Use the parallelogram rule, as in fig F, to check your answer to part (a).
5
In order to try and recover a car stuck in a muddy field, two tractors pull on it. The first acts at an angle of
20° left of the forwards direction with a force of 2250 N. The second acts 15° to the right of the forwards
direction with a force of 2000 N. Draw a scale diagram of the situation and find the resultant force on the
stuck car.
Key definitions
Resultant force is the total force (vector sum) acting on a body when all the forces acting are added
together accounting for their directions.
A free-body force diagram of an object has the object isolated, and all the forces that act on it are drawn
in at the points where they act, using arrows to represent the forces.
22
2.1
Adding forces
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• add two or more vectors by drawing
add two perpendicular vectors by calculation
Magnitude of the resultant force
To calculate the resultant magnitude of two perpendicular forces,
we can draw them, one after the other, as the two sides of a
right-angled triangle and use Pythagoras' theorem to calculate the
size of the hypotenuse.
Resultant = 130N
70N
Forces are vectors. This means that measuring their magnitude is
important, but equally important is knowing the direction in which
they act. In order to calculate the overall effect of multiple forces
acting on the same object, we can use vector addition to work out
the resultant force. This resultant force can be considered as a
single force that has the same effect as all the individual forces
combined.
110N
fig C The resultant force here is calculated using Pythagoras' theorem:
F = 7(702 + 110) = 130N
Adding forces in the same line
If two or more forces are acting along the same line, then
combining them is simply a case of adding or subtracting their
magnitudes depending on their directions.
Direction of the resultant force
As forces are vectors, when we find a resultant force it must have
both magnitude and direction. For perpendicular forces (vectors).
trigonometry will determine the direction.
IN
11N
CAN
Resultant = 130N
70N
>18N resultant
11N
7N &
4N resultant
fig A Adding forces in the same line requires a consideration of their
comparative directions.
110N
fig D The resultant force here is at an angle up from the horizontal of:
0 = tan-1 (40= 32
Adding perpendicular forces
The effect on an object of two forces that are acting at right
angles (perpendicular) to each other will be the vector sum
of their individual effects. We need to add the sizes with
consideration for the directions in order to find the resultant.
Learning tip
Always take care to state where the angle for a vector's direction is
measured. For example, in fig D, the angle should be stated as 32° up
from the horizontal. This is most easily expressed on a diagram of the
situation, where you draw in the angle.
Adding two non-perpendicular forces
The geometry of perpendicular vectors makes the calculation of
the resultant simple. We can find the resultant of any two vectors
by drawing one after the other, and then the resultant will be the
third side of the triangle from the start of the first one to the end
of the second one. A scale drawing of the vector triangle will
allow measurement of the size and direction of the resultant.
400N
390
fig B These two rugby players are each putting a force on their opponent. The
forces are at right angles, so the overall effect would be to move him in a
third direction, which we could calculate.
450N
fig E The resultant force here can be found by scale drawing of the two forces
and then measurement of the resultant on the drawing using a ruler and
a protractor.
21
Motion
2.1
Learning tip
Resolving vectors could also be achieved using a scale diagram.
Using this method in rough work may help you to get an idea as to
what the answer should be in order to check that your calculations
are about right
However, the submarine commander is likely to be most interested
in knowing how quickly his vessel is approaching the seabed. This
could be found by resolving the velocity of the submarine into
a component parallel with the seabed, and the right-angled pair
with that will be a component perpendicular to the seabed. It is
this vero that will tell the submarine commander how quickly he is
approaching the seabed.
V
= vsin 15°
perp
Alternative resolution angles
If we know the velocity of an object, we have seen that we can
resolve this into a pair of velocity vectors at right angles to each
other. The choice of direction of the right-angle pair, though, is
arbitrary, and can be chosen to suit a given situation.
submarine velocity, v
seabed
vcos 15º J
wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
L
30°
.
..
.
..
.
...
..
.
..
..
..
..
.
..
.
...
..
.
..
Learning tin
The vectors produced by resolution can be at any angle we like with
respect to the original vector, as long as they are perpendicular to
each other and their resultant equals the original vector. In order to
allow for every pair to add up to the original vector, their magnitudes
will vary as the angle is changed.
fig G Submarine velocity resolved into components parallel and perpendicular
to the seabed.
Questions
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(a) On graph paper, draw a velocity vector for a stone fired from a
catapult at 45° to the horizontal. Your arrow should be 10 cm
long, representing a velocity of 10ms. Draw onto your
diagram the horizontal and vertical components that would
make up the overall velocity. Use a ruler to measure the size
of the horizontal and vertical components, and convert these
lengths into metres per second using the same scaling.
(b) Find the horizontal and vertical velocity components for this
catapult stone by calculation, and compare with your answers
from part (a).
velocity, v
2
A javelin is thrown at 16 msl at an angle of 35° up from the
horizontal. Calculate the horizontal and vertical components of the
javelin's motion.
30°
fig E Resolving submarine velocity vectors can be important to avoid crashing.
Aladder is leant against a wall, at an angle of 28to the wall. The
440 N force from the floor acts along the length of the ladder.
Calculate the horizontal and vertical components of the force from
the floor that act on the bottom of the ladder.
Imagine a submarine descending underwater close to an angled
seabed. The velocity could be resolved into a pair of vectors,
horizontal and vertical.
A plane is flying at 240ms on a bearing of 125° from due north.
Calculate its velocity component due south, and its velocity
component due east.
45°
submarine velocity, v
Kev definitions
Resolution or resolving vectors is the determination of a pair of
vectors, at right angles to each other, that sums to give the single
vector they were resolved from.
V
= vcos 45º
vent
WWWWWWWWWWWW
W
V
= vsin 45°
fig F Submarine velocity resolved into horizontal and vertical components.
Motion
2.1
Consider the second question first: uniform acceleration under
gravity means a = -9.81 ms 2 and SUVAT can be used. We know
u= 5.5 ms 1; at the top of the path, v=0ms 1; and we want to
find the height, s.
v2 = u2 + 2as
5-v2 - u2_02 - (5.5)2
In the example of fig A, what is the velocity of the stone when it
hits the beach?
The horizontal velocity was given as 8.2 ms-!. To calculate the
vertical velocity: u = Oms-l; a= -9.81 ms-2; and s= -60 m.
v2vertical = u? + 2as = 02 + (2 X-9.81 % -60) = 1177.2
... Vertical = 1177.2 = -34.3
Vvertical = -34.3 ms?
Pythagoras" theorem gives the magnitude of the final velocity:
v = (8.22 + 34.32)
.. v = 35.3 ms-1
Trigonometry will give the angle at which the stone is flying on
impact with the beach:
$= 2 * 2 * -9.81
S = 1.54 m
Note that 1.54 metres is actually the height the ball reaches above
the point of release at which it left the hand - the point where its
initial speed was 5.5 ms - but this anomaly is often ignored in
projectiles calculations.
tan 0 - 34.3
8.2
.. A = 77º
The stone's velocity when it lands on the beach is 35.3 metres per
second at an angle of 77° down from the horizontal.
Learning tip
For virtually all projectile motion calculations, we assume that there
is no air resistance, so the only force acting is gravity, vertically
downwards.
The time of flight for the ball will be just the time taken to rise and
fall vertically. We find the time to reach the highest point, and then
double that value. We know u = 5.5 ms-l; at the top of the path,
y = Oms-l; and we want to find the time, I.
Learning tin
We have used the convention that up is positive throughout this
section. It doesn't matter which direction you choose as negative,
but you must use it consistently throughout a calculation or there
may be errors in the answers.
V = u + at
..
t-V-u
0 - (5.5)
a -9.81
t = 0.56 s
So the overall time of flight will be 0.56 seconds doubled: total
time = 1.12 s.
Vertical throws
Imagine throwing a ball to a friend - it goes up as well as
forwards. One common idea in these calculations is that an object
projected with a vertical upwards component of motion will have
a symmetrical trajectory. At the highest point, the vertical velocity
is momentarily zero. Getting to this point will take half of the time
of the whole flight.
Questions
highest point
1 A boy throws a ball vertically at a velocity of 4.8 ms.
(a) How long is it before he catches it again?
(b) What will be the ball's greatest height above the point
of release?
2
The boy in question 1 now throws his ball horizontally out of a high
window with a velocity of 3.1 ms?
(a) How long will it take to reach the ground 18 m below?
(b) How far away, horizontally, should his friend stand in order to
catch the ball?
3
fig C Considering only the vertical component of velocity
A netball is thrown with a velocity of 6.0 ms at an angle of 40° to
the vertical, towards the netball hoop.
(a) If the hoop is 0.90 m above the point of release, will the ball rise
high enough to go in the hoop?
(b) If the centre of the hoop is 3.00 m away, horizontally, from the
point of release, explain whether or not you believe this throw will
score in the hoop. Support your explanation with calculations.
In the example of fig C, a ball is thrown with a vertical velocity
component of 5.5 ms 1. How much time is it in flight? How high
does it get?
These questions would have the same answer if a person threw
the ball vertically up and caught it again themselves. This again
highlights the independence of horizontal and vertical motions. It
may be that an initial velocity at an angle is quoted, so that we
need to resolve the velocity vector into its horizontal and vertical
components in order to know that here Vvertical = 5.5 ms 1.
Kev definitions
A projectile is a moving object on which the only force of
significance acting is gravity. The trajectory is thus pre-determined
by its initial velocity.
BIGGER
DURHAM CASTLE SIEGE WA
Durham Castle was initially built as a fortress against Scottish raiders. In this activity, you will need to
imagine attacking the castle using a catapult that fires a boulder as a projectile.
In addition to the layout shown in fig B, we need information
about the initial velocity of the boulder. The catapult sling could
act for 0.30 s to accelerate the boulder (mass = 12 kg) with a force
of 1550 N. It causes the boulder to leave the catapult at an angle of
45° to the horizontal.
Steps to the answer
By working back from the answer we are looking for, we can
see what calculations will need to be made in order to solve this
problem. The fundamental idea is that the parabola trajectory
would be symmetrical if the flight was not interrupted by crashing
into the castle wall.
1 To find the height up the wall from the ground, we will need to
work out how far down from the boulder's maximum height
it falls:
H=hmax - h
2 To find h, we need to know the time of flight, total so we can
split this into a time to reach hmas, and see how much time is left
to fall height h. We will use gravitational acceleration vertically
to calculate the vertical drop in that remaining time:
S.
fig A Durham Castle is now an UNESCO World Heritage Site and is a part of
Durham University
In this section, I will use some basic mechanics to answer a
question regarding the prospect that Scottish raiders really could
have assaulted Durham Castle in the manner described previously.
The seventeenth-century source material suggests that the castle
was under siege by the Scots for more than a week and "battered
by boulders'. However, the current walls bear little in the way of
obvious battle scars, despite being apparently part of the original
medieval construction.
Looking at fig B, the question that needs to be answered here is:
"How high up the front wall of the castle will the boulder hit?' This
height is marked on fig B as 'H'.
total = V horizontal
From fig B, we can see that s = 150 m.
3 Vhorizontal can be found by resolving the velocity to give the
horizontal component:
Vhorizontal = total X cos 45º
4 The overall velocity will come from the sling's acceleration of
the boulder:
v=u + at
where u=0ms, and the question tells us that the sling acts for
0.30 seconds.
5 Newton's second law of motion will give us the acceleration the
sling causes:
----
total
H|24m| 1
1
1
Durham Castle
Calculate the answer by reversing these steps:
The acceleration caused by the sling:
s= 150 m
fig B Details of the trajectory of a catapult boulder towards Durham Castle.
We assume the boulder leaves the catapult at ground level.
Where else will l encounter these themes?
1.1
21 YOU ARE
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
HERE
36
Exam-style questions
2.1
9 The photograph shows a sequence of images of a bouncing
tennis ball.
11 During a lesson on Newton's laws of motion, a student says,
"We don't really need to bother with Newton's first law because
it is included in his second law".
State Newton's first two laws of motion and explain how
Newton's second law includes the first law.
[5]
[Total: 5]
12 The diagram shows an arrangement used to launch a light
foam rocket at a school science competition.
A student plots the following graph and claims that it shows
the vertical motion of the ball in the photograph.
Velocity/ms-1
0.5
1.0
Time/s
(a) Without carrying out any calculations, describe how the
following can be found from the graph
(i) the vertical distance travelled by the ball between
0.5 s and 1.0 s
(ii) the acceleration at Y.
[2]
(b) The graph contains several errors in its representation of
the motion of the ball.
Explain two of these errors.
[Total: 6]
The rocket is launched at the level of one end of a long table
and lands at the other end at the same level. The students
measure the horizontal distance travelled by the rocket and the
time of fight.
(a) The rocket travels 1.88 m in a time of 0.88 s.
(i) Show that the horizontal component of the initial
velocity of the rocket is about 2 ms-1.
(ii) Show that the vertical component of the initial
velocity of the rocket is about 4ms-1.
(iii) Calculate the initial velocity of the rocket.
(b) The students obtained their data by filming the flight.
When they checked the maximum height reached by the
rocket they found it was less than the height predicted
using this velocity
(i) Suggest why the maximum height reached was less
than predicted.
[1]
(ii) Give two advantages of filming the flight to obtain
the data.
[2]
[Total: 11]
10 There has been a proposal to build a train tunnel underneath
the Atlantic Ocean from England to America. The suggestion
is that in the future the trip of 5000 km could take as little as
one hour.
Assume that half the time is spent accelerating uniformly and
the other half is spent decelerating uniformly with the same
magnitude as the acceleration.
(a) Show that the acceleration would be about 2 ms? [2]
(b) Calculate the maximum speed.
[2]
(c) Calculate the resultant force required to decelerate the train
mass of train = 4.5 x 105 kg
[Total: 6]
12)
39
Motion
2.1
Learning tip
The kinematics equations, often referred to as the SUVAT equations,
are only valid if there is a constant acceleration. If the acceleration is
changing they cannot be used.
We plot a graph of h on the x-axis and t2 on the y-axis to give a
straight best-fit line. The gradient of the line on this graph will be
2/g, from which we can find g.
We could find a value for g by taking a single measurement from this
experiment and using the equation to calculate it:
2h
972
Investigation
Finding the acceleration due to gravity by freefall
A system for timing the fall of an object under gravity can allow us to
measure the acceleration due to gravity. In this experiment, we
measure the time taken by a falling object to drop under gravity
from a certain height, and then alter the height and measure again.
However, a single measurement in any experiment is prone to
uncertainty from both random and systematic errors. We can reduce
such uncertainties significantly by taking many readings and plotting
a graph, which leads to much more reliable conclusions.
start switch-
O
solenoid
Questions
– iron ball
1 What is the final velocity of a bike that starts at 4 ms and has zero
acceleration act on it for 10 seconds?
electronic
timer
2
How far will the bike in question 1 travel in the 10-second time
period?
height, h
3
Calculate the acceleration in each of the following cases:
(a) v = 22 msl; u = 8 ms; t = 2.65
(b) a ball starts at rest and after 30 m its velocity has reached
4.8 ms
(c) in 15 s, a train moves 100 m from rest.
timing gate
fig C The freefall time of an object from different heights allows us to find
the acceleration due to gravity, g.
If we vary the height from which the object falls, the time taken to
land will vary. SUVAT tells us that:
S = ut + at
As it always starts from rest, u = 0 throughout; the acceleration is that
caused by gravity, g; and the distance involved is the height from
which it is released, h. Thus:
h = gt2
The bird in fig A drops the stone from a height of 88 m above the
water surface. Initially, the stone has zero vertical velocity. How long
will it take the stone to reach the surface of the pond? (Assume air
resistance is negligible.)
If the stone in fig A enters the water at 41.6 msl and takes 0.6 s to
travel the 3 metres to the bottom of the pond, what is its average
acceleration in the pond water?
Compare this equation with the equation for a straight-line graph:
y = mx + c
Kev definitions
Kinematics is the study of the description of the motion of objects.
Uniform motion is motion when there is no acceleration:
displacement (m)
velocity (ms') =
time (s)
Thinking Bigger
2.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the draft dissertation.
1. The extract opposite is a draft for a university essay on Medieval History. Consider the
extract and comment on the type of writing being used. For example, think about
whether this is a scientist reporting the results of their experiments, a scientific review of
data, a newspaper or a magazine-style article for a specific audience. Try and answer the
following questions:
a. How can you tell that the author is sceptical about the historical source material?
b. What is the purpose of this mathematical analysis, for its inclusion in this essay?
Once you have
answered the
calculation questions
below, decide whether
you think the Scottish
siege happened as the
author suggests his
source tells the story,
Now we will look at the physics in detail. You may need to combine concepts from different areas of
physics to work out the answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work
in context with the areas of your course.
08535000000000
2. Complete the calculation steps, in reverse as suggested, in order to find out the
answer, H:
a. the acceleration caused by the sling
b. overall velocity that the boulder is projected from the sling
c. horizontal and vertical components of the velocity
d. time of flight found from the horizontal travel
e. time to reach maximum height using vertical motion
f. remaining flight time from maximum height
g. height fallen from the maximum in the remaining flight time
h. final answer H.
3. State two assumptions that have been made in these calculations.
4. Calculate what difference there would be in the answer if the catapult was loaded with
different boulders of masses 10 kg and 14 kg. Note from fig B that the castle walls are
24 m high. Comment on these answers.
5. If the available supply of boulders offered very variable masses, how might the Scots be
able to overcome the problems shown in question 4.
Command word
When the word 'calculate
is used, your answer
needs to be numerical
and show your working.
665557887068070
Activity
Imagine Claus Thermad is a friend of yours, and he has come to you for help with the calculations as he is
not a strong scientist. His section 'Steps to the answer' was taken from a research source about a different
castle under siege. Write an email to Claus to explain the calculations required in each step.
You can assume that
Claus understands
mathematics, and is
generally intelligent -a
student who could have
done A level physics
but preferred arts
subjects.
By Claus Thermad, from an early draft of his dissertation for a Masters degree in Medieval History
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
37
2.1
Exam-style questions
1 The unit of force is the Newton. One Newton is equivalent to:
(a) 0.1 kg
(b) 1 kgms!
(c) 1 kg ms2
(d) 1 ms2
[1]
[Total: 1]
6 A student is required to measure the speed of a trolley rolling
down a slope. This could be done using a ruler and a stopwatch
but the student prefers a method using ICT.
(a) The student uses a light gate as shown in the diagram.
Describe how the student obtains the measurements
needed to calculate speed.
[2]
light gate
2 A ball is thrown vertically upwards at a speed of 11.0 ms-1.
What is the maximum height it reaches?
(a) 0.561 m
(b) 1.12 m
(c) 6.17m
(d) 12.3 m
[Total: 1]
[1]
(b) The student thinks that the stopwatch method is less
reliable than the ICT method.
Discuss what makes using a stopwatch less reliable. [2]
[Total: 4]
3 Calculate the moment exerted on the nut by the spanner shown
in the diagram.
24 cm
20N
7 You are asked to determine the acceleration of free fall at
the surface of the Earth, g, using a free fall method in the
laboratory
(a) Describe the apparatus you would use, the measurements
you would take and explain how you would use them to
determine g
(b) Give one precaution you would take to ensure the
accuracy of your measurements.
[Total: 7]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
[1]
(a) 2.4 Nm
(b) 4.2 Nm
(c) 4.8 Nm
(d) 420 Nm
[Total: 11
[1]
[Total: 1]
8 The graph shows how displacement varies with time for an
object that starts from rest with constant acceleration.
4 (a) What is meant by a vector quantity?
(b) A car is driven around a bend at a constant speed.
Explain what happens to its velocity.
[Total: 3]
[2]
Distance/m
5 The Saturn V rocket used in NASA's space programme had a
mass of 3.04 x 10kg. It took off vertically with a thrust force
of 3.40 x 107N.
(a) Show that the resultant force on the rocket is around
4x 10ⓇN.
(b) Calculate the initial acceleration.
[2]
(c) After 150 s the rocket reached a speed of 2390 ms-1.
Calculate its average acceleration.
(d) Suggest why the initial acceleration and average
acceleration are different.
[Total: 8]
Time/s
11)
(a) Use the distance-time graph to determine the speed of
the object at a time of 4.0 s.
[3]
(b) Calculate the acceleration.
[2]
[Total: 5]
38
2.1
7.
Resolving vectors
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain that any vector can be split into two components at
right angles to each other
calculate the values of the component vectors in any such
right-angled pair (resolution)
vertical motion. However, this can only be done if we can isolate
the vertical component of the netball's motion. Similarly, we could
find out if it will travel far enough horizontally to reach the hoop if
we know how fast it is moving horizontally.
The netball's velocity must be resolved into horizontal and vertical
components. This will require some trigonometrical calculations.
We have seen that vectors that act perpendicular to each other can
be combined to produce a single vector that has the same effect as
the two separate vectors. If we start with a single vector, we can find
a pair of vectors at right angles to each other that would combine
to give our single original vector. This reverse process is called
resolution or resolving vectors. The resolved pair of vectors will
both start at the same point as the original single vector.
Vertical component of velocity
Redrawing the components in fig B to show how they add up to
produce the 4.2 ms- velocity vector, shows again that they form
a right-angled triangle, as in fig C. This means we can use the
relationship:
vms-1
F
Cos 40° = 1
i
4.2 ms-1
v = 4.2 x cos 40º vms!
= 4.2 x 0.766
V = 3.2 msi
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 ms in
-
-
-
-
-
13ms-1
-
-
-
-
-
-
WWWWWWWWWWWWW
40°
W
22.6°
12ms-1
fig A The original velocity vector of 13 ms- has been resolved into a
horizontal and a vertical velocity vector, which would separately be the
same overall effect. An object moving right at 12 ms' and up at 5 ms
will move 13 metres each second at an angle of 22.6° up and right from
the horizontal.
fig C Finding the components of velocity.
Resolving vectors calculations
In order to resolve a vector into a pair at right angles, we must
know all the details of the original vector. This means we must
know its size and direction. The direction is most commonly given
as an angle to either the vertical or the horizontal. This is useful,
as we most commonly want to split the vector up into a horizontal
and vertical pair.
Horizontal component of velocity
Similarly, for the horizontal component, we can use the
relationship:
sin 40° =
V. = 4.2 x sin 40° = 4.2 x 0.643
Vi = 2.7 ms
vms-
4.2ms ir
Learning tip
sin 8° = opposite/hypotenuse
cos 6° = adjacent/hypotenuse
tan 0º = opposite/adjacent
opposite
-
-
WWWWWWWWWW
-
-
-
-
-
-
adjacent
hypotenuse
vms-1
fig B Resolving a velocity vector into vertical and horizontal components.
In the example of fig B, a netball is thrown into the air at an angle
of 40° to the vertical. In order to find out if it will go high enough
to reach the hoop, SUVAT calculations could be done on its
fig D Trigonometry reminder.
32
