BIGGER
THE MECHANICS OF HOCKEY
Hockey is the second most popular sport on Earth in terms of numbers of people playing. It is a fast
moving, skilful sport in which the ball may fly at over 100 miles per hour.
In this activity, we will consider how mechanics can apply to events in hockey.
GOALSCORING
In this section, we will look at some of the science behind shots on
goal.
A goal only counts if the ball is hit from inside the shooting circle.
This means the ball must be no more than about 14 metres from
the goal. Assuming zero drag forces, we can calculate the longest
time the goalkeeper has to react to this shot after it leaves the stick.
We know the start velocity and the distance, so this is a
straightforward question.
SO
soi =
fig A Georgie Twigg of England takes on two New Zealand defenders.
If we want to calculate how fast a stationary hockey ball would
be moving after a hard hit at goal, we need to think about its
acceleration by using Newton's second law. A standard hockey ball
has a mass of 0.16 kg. If the stick applies a force of 140 N for a
twentieth of a second, we can work out the answer:
F = ma
t = 0.32 s
so a= 27
If the goalkeeper reacts quickly enough to get a leg pad in the way,
how deeply will this shot squash into the foam padding which is
no more than 10 cm thick? The maximum decelerating force the
foam can provide to slow the ball is 2000 newtons. Here we should
consider the removal of all the ball's kinetic energy as work being
done.
Ex = mv2 = (0.16) * (44)2 = 155J
AW = FAS
10.16
: a = 875 ms?
V = u + at the ball starts stationary,
so u=0ms, a = 875 ms 2,1 = 0.05 s
V=0+875 (0.05)
V = 44 m s-1
As=
As = AW = 155 = 7.7 x 10-2 m
2000
So the pad depresses by just under 8 cm. The goalkeeper is likely
to feel this but it should not be painful. According to Newton's
third law, when the pad exerts a force of 2000 N on the ball, the
ball exerts a force of 2000 N on the pad. If the goalkeeper's leg
were not protected, this force could cause a serious injury.
fig B Nick Catlin of England is tackled by an Australian defender.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
YOU ARE
HERE
2.3
3.1
3.2
48
Energy
2.2
2 Calculate the work done by the tension in the kite string in fig E
over the distance shown.
Efficiency
From the equations above, we can calculate the work and power
generated in different situations. If most of the energy is not
actually transferred into a form that is useful to us, then the
activity may be a waste of energy. The ability of a machine to
convert energy usefully is called efficiency.
Efficiency is defined mathematically as:
120N
300
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
efficiency - useful work done
total energy input
useful energy output
efficiency =
total energy input
40 m
fig E Moving at an angle to the force doing work.
3
(a) What is the power of an electric motor, in watts, if it lifts 500g,
through 80 cm in 20 seconds?
(b) What is the motor's efficiency if the mains electricity supplied it
with a total of 12 ) to make the lift?
In loading a delivery van, the driver pushed a 15 kg crate for
5 metres up a ramp. She had to push with a force of 132 N and the
vertical height gained was 1.3 m. What was the efficiency of pushing
this crate up the ramp onto the back of the van?
If we remember that power is energy divided by time, then
measuring the energy flows in a machine for a fixed amount of
time means that we can write a power version of the efficiency
equation:
useful energy output
time
efficiency =
total energy input
time
useful power output
efficiency =
total power input
The answer will be a decimal between zero and one. It is
common to convert this to a percentage value (multiply the
decimal by 100).
WORKED EXAMPLE
If the forklift truck referred to above lifted the crate when supplied
with electrical energy from its battery at a rate of 3000 joules per
second, what is its efficiency?
useful power output
efficiency =
total power input
1470
Key definitions
Conservation of energy requires that energy can never
be created or destroyed.
Work done in a mechanical system is the product of a force and the
distance moved in the direction of the force:
work done () = force (N) x distance moved in the direction of
the force (m)
AW = FAS
Energy is the property of an object that gives it the capacity to do
work. A change in the amount of energy of an object could be
equated to work being done, even if this is not mechanical - a
change in the heat energy of a sample of gas, for example.
Power is defined as the rate of energy transfer.
efficiency = 3000
efficiency = 0.49 = 49%
P-E-AW
Questions
Patt
Efficiency is the ability of a machine to convert energy usefully:
useful energy output
efficiency =
total energy input
useful power output
efficiency = total power input
1 In these two situations, who does more work, and by how much?
(a) A lioness carries a 2.8 kg cub 4.60 m up a tree.
(b) An eagle lifts a 1.4 kg rabbit 8.25 m up to her nest.
47
TOPIC 2
Mechanics
CHAPTER
2.2
Energy
Introduction
The last chapter finished with a discussion of the motion of a projectile boulder's flight. An
alternative way of considering changes in movements of objects affected by gravity is to follow
what happens to their energy. An object held up has an amount of gravitational potential energy as
a consequence of its position. This energy can be converted into kinetic, or movement, energy if the object
falls. Humans have evolved over millions of years to avoid situations in which they might fall a great height,
as such falls are generally dangerous - the kinetic energy that humans have gained from falling could be
transferred into other forms of energy in their bodies, via large forces, causing injuries.
The effect of gravity on the movement of an object leads into consideration of the energy a body may
possess or transfer. There are equations for calculating kinetic energy and gravitational potential energy,
and the transfer of energy when a force is used to cause the transfer. These formulae and Newton's laws
can be used together to work out everything we might wish to know about the movement of any everyday
object in any everyday situation.
Whilst it is difficult for scientists to describe or identify the exact nature of energy, the equations that
describe energy relationships have also consistently held up to experimental scrutiny.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the joule,))
• Changing the subject of an equation (eg. finding the velocity of a falling object)
Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. calculating the power used)
Plotting two variables from experimental or other data, understanding that y = mx + c represents a linear
relationship and determining the slope of a linear graph (e.g. finding the acceleration due to gravity
experimentally)
Using angles in regular 2D and 3D structures (e.g. finding the angle with which to calculate work done)
• Using sin, cos and tan in physical problems (e.g. calculating the work done by a force acting at an angle)
2.2
1.
Gravitational potential and kinetic
energies
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
calculate transfers of gravitational potential energy near the Earth's surface
calculate the kinetic energy of a body
• calculate exchanges between gravitational potential and kinetic energies, based on energy
conservation
Gravitational potential energy (E) is the energy an object has by virtue of its position in a
gravitational field. Kinetic energy (Ex) is the energy an object has by virtue of its movement. As
objects rise or fall, gravitational potential energy can be converted to kinetic energy and kinetic
energy can be converted to gravitational potential energy.
fig A The gravitational potential
energy transferred into kinetic
energy for a falling coconut
can be a significant hazard in
tropical countries.
Gravitational potential energy
Gravitational potential energy (gpe) can be calculated using the equation:
gpe (J) = mass (kg) ~ gravitational field strength (N kg") x height (m)
Ep = mgh
Usually, the gpe is considered as a change caused by a change in height, for example, the change in
gpe when you lift an object onto a shelf. This alters the equation slightly to consider transfers to or
from gpe:
AE, = mgah
A brick of mass 2.2 kg is lifted vertically through a height of 1.24 m. The gpe gained is calculated
as follows:
AE = mgah
AE, = 2.2 x 9.81 x 1.24
AE = 26.8)
Writing the formula this way suggests that the gravitational field strength is a fixed value. The
gravitational field strength is a measure of the pull of gravity by a planet at a distance from its centre.
This is not actually constant, as the strength of the gravitational field experienced by a mass is
inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the planet's centre. However, close to the
Earth's surface, over small scales, such as the heights that humans deal with in everyday life, it is an
acceptably close approximation to say g is fixed at 9.81 N kg.
Did you know?
The strength of the Earth's
gravitational field at the top of
the Eiffel Tower is less than a
hundredth of a per cent
smaller than at the foot of the
Eiffel Tower.
Kinetic energy
Kinetic energy can be calculated using the equation:
kinetic energy () = } mass (kg) * (speed) (mºs)
Ex = xm x 12
For example, a large jumbo jet plane might have a cruising speed of 900 kmh- and a flight mass of
400 tonnes. What would its kinetic energy be?
First convert into SI units:
9 x 105
V = 900 km h-1 = 900 000 mh- ==
m = 400 x 1000 = 4 x 105 kg
Ex = 3 x mx v2
Ex= x 4 x 105 x 2502
Ex = 1.25 x 1010) = 12.5 G)
60 x 60 = 250 m s-1
fig B Ajumbo jet plane has a lot of
kinetic energy
42
What have I studied before?
Calculating gravitational potential and kinetic
energies
Energy transfers and the effects of friction
Calculations of work and power
Speed, distance, displacement, time, velocity
acceleration
Resolving vectors
• Newton's laws of motion
• Kinematics equations
What will I study later?
Momentum and the principle of conservation of
momentum
Elastic and inelastic collisions
Elastic potential energy
Fluid movements and terminal velocity
Potential difference modelled on gravitational
potential energy
Energy conservation in electrical circuits
Power in electric circuits
What will I study in this chapter?
Calculations of gravitational potential energy and
kinetic energy
Calculating exchanges between gravitational
potential and kinetic energies, based on energy
conservation
Understanding energy transferred as work done,
and making calculations of the work and power
How to calculate work done when the force is not
along the line of motion
What is meant be efficiency, and how to
calculate it
Exam-style questions
2.2
8 The photograph shows a lawnmower being used to cut grass.
6 One account of the origin of the term horsepower is as follows.
In the eighteenth century, James Watt manufactured steam
engines. He needed a way to demonstrate the benefits of
these compared to the horses they replaced. He did some
calculations based on horses walking in circles to turn a mill
wheel.
Watt observed that a horse could turn the wheel 144 times in
one hour. The horse travelled in a circle of radius 3.7 m and
exerted a force of 800 N.
(a) Show that the work done by the horse in turning the wheel
through one revolution was about 20 000 J.
[3]
(b) Calculate the average power of the horse in SI units. [3]
[Total: 6]
[2]
7 In a demonstration of energy transfer, a large pendulum is
made by suspending a 7.0 kg bowling ball on a long piece of
wire.
A student is invited to pull back the ball until it just touches
her nose and then to release it and stand perfectly still while
waiting for the ball to return.
(a) (1) In order to push the lawnmower, a minimum force of
650 N must be applied to the handle of the lawnmower
at an angle of 42° to the horizontal.
Show that the horizontal component of the force is
about 500N.
(ii) The lawnmower is used to cut 15 strips of grass, each
7 m long
Calculate the work done by the person pushing the
lawnmower.
[2]
(b) This photograph shows a lawnmower with the top section
of the handle horizontal.
The following instructions are given:
Explain how this changes the minimum force required to
push the lawnmower.
[Total: 6]
Do not push the ball - just release it.
Do not move your face before the ball returns.
Explain this demonstration and the need for these instructions.
[6]
[Total: 6]
9 Metrology is the science of measurement and World Metrology
Day is May 20th. In 2010, the day was used to celebrate the
50th anniversary of the SI system.
A metrologist from the National Physical Laboratory said on a
radio programme that the SI system uses units that everyone
can understand. He stated the following example.
'If you hold an apple in your hand it's about a newton, if you
raise it through one metre that's about a joule and if you do it in
one second that's about a watt."
Assuming that the apple has a mass of 100 g, explain and
justify the statements made about the three words in italics. [6]
[Total: 6]
51
22
Work and power
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
calculate energy transferred as work done, including when the force is not along the line of motion
• calculate the power of an energy transfer
explain efficiency and make calculations of it
We often make assumptions that allow simplification of calculations in physics. In general these
assumptions make little difference as they are chosen to ignore effects which have a very small
impact on the actual real world answers. An example of this is with the conversion of gravitational
potential energy into kinetic energy, where the effects of air resistance are ignored.
It is important to remember that the principle of conservation of energy insists that no energy
can be lost in any scenario. Even if we were to consider the loss of kinetic energy to heating of the
air through air resistance, the total amount of energy would be constant; it would simply have spread
into more different forms.
Work
In physics, the phrase "doing work has a specific meaning to do with energy use. The amount of
work done means the amount of energy transferred, so work is measured in joules.
In general terms, we can express any energy transfer as work done. For example, a 15 W light bulb
working for 10 seconds transfers 150 J of electrical energy as heat and light - it does 150 J of work.
In any situation where we know how to calculate the energy before and after, we can calculate the
energy transferred and thus the work done.
Forcing work
If energy is transferred mechanically by means of a force, then the amount of work done can be
calculated simply:
work done (J) = force (N) x distance moved in the direction of the force (m)
AW = FAS
co
fig A Doing work by transferring
gravitational potential energy
to a heavy object.
1.24m
21.11
fig B Work' on a building site.
In the example of fig B, a brick of mass 2.2 kg is lifted vertically against its weight through a height
of 1.24 m. The work done is:
AW = FAS
AW = mg x As
W = 2.2 x 9.81 x 1.24
W = 26.8)
Note that this is the same amount of energy as we calculated for the gravitational potential energy of
this same brick undergoing the same lift in Section 2.2.1.
2.2
Learning tip
Beware of confusing AW for
work with W for weight.
Learning tip
An object that gains gravitational potential energy is having work done on it against its weight force.
weight = mass x gravitational field strength
W = mg
work = force x distance = weight x height = mgah
friction
weight
Work done by forces at an angle
In the bricklaying example on the previous page, the direction of movement was exactly in line with
the force lifting the brick. This is an unusual situation, and usually the force doing work will be at an
angle to the direction of movement. In fig C, gravity pulls the child down the slide but it must work
against friction. The weight acts vertically downwards, but the friction acts up the slide. Friction
always acts in the exact opposite direction to movement.
Assuming that the child slides at constant velocity, Newton's first law of motion tells us that this
means the friction is exactly balanced by the component of gravity pulling the child down the slope.
So to find the component of the weight force that is acting down the slope, we will need to resolve it
in the directions of down the slope and perpendicular to it.
The weight component working down the slope equals the friction, F
F = mgcoso
The work done is force multiplied by the distance travelled along the line of the force, so here:
work = As x mgcos
This example shows us the general formula for calculating the work done when there is
an angle between the force and the distance along which we are measuring:
AW = FAscos
fig C Gravity working against friction.
WOOD
Power
weight
fig D The weight force is the resultant
of its components along the
slide and perpendicular to it.
Power is defined as the rate of energy transfer. This may be done with reference to work done.
energy transferred (1)
power (W) = ;
time for the energy transfer (s)
work done (1)
power (W) =
time for the work to be done (s)
Remember:
work (J) force (N) distance moved in the direction of the force (m)
AW = FAS
P-AW
So:
force (N) < distance moved (m)
power (W) =
time for the force to move (s)
P-FAs
For example, the power of a forklift truck lifting a 120 kg crate vertically up 5.00 m in 4.0 seconds
would be calculated as:
P-FAs mgås
tt
p. 120 x 9.81 x 5
4.0
P = 1470 W = 1.47 kW
Learning tip
1 kilowatt (kW) = 1000 watts (W) = 1 * 103W
1 megawatt (MW) = 1000 kW = 1 x 106W
1 gigawatt (GW) = 1000 MW = 1 * 106kW = 1 x 109W
1 terawatt (TW) = 1000 GW = 1 x 106 MW = 1 x 10'kW = 1 x 1012 W
46
2.2
Investigation
WP
Finding g from energy conservation
There are a number of different experimental methods for finding the gravitational field strength.
One example of these relies on the conversion of gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy.
In this experiment, we measure the velocity that has been reached by a falling object after it has fallen
under gravity from a certain height, and then alter the height and measure the velocity again.
If we vary the height from which the object falls, the gravitational potential energy is different at each
height. This gpe will all be converted into kinetic energy.
mgah = {mv2
As we saw previously, this equation can be simplified to give:
v2 = 2g4h
Compare this equation with the equation for a straight-line graph: y = mx + c
If we plot a graph of Ah on the x-axis and v2 on the y-axis, we will get a straight best-fit line. The gradient
of the line on this graph will be twice the gravitational field strength, 2g, from which we can find g.
We could find a value for g by taking a single measurement from this experiment and using the equation
to calculate it:
v2
9-20h
However, as mentioned in Section 2.1.5, a single measurement in any experiment is prone to
uncertainty from both random and systematic errors. The reliability of the conclusions is
significantly improved with multiple readings and graphical analysis.
fig E The freefall velocity of an object
from different heights allows
us to find the gravitational field
strength, g.
Questions
| Estimate the speed at which the coconut in fig A would hit the sand.
2 How fast would a fountain need to squirt its water upwards to reach a height of 15 m?
3 How fast would a snowboarder be moving if she slid down a slope dropping at a vertical height of 45 m?
4 How high will a 48 kg trampolinist rise if he leaves the trampoline at a speed of 6.1 m s-l?
5 What assumption must you make in order to answer all of the above questions?
Key definitions
Gravitational potential energy (E) is the energy an object has by virtue of its position in a
gravitational field.
gpe (1) = mass (kg) * gravitational field strength (N kg ') * height (m)
Ep = mgh OR AE = mgah
Kinetic energy (Ex) is the energy an object has by virtue of its movement.
kinetic energy () = } x mass (kg) * (speed) (m? s?)
Ex = } xm x 2
44
2.2
Exam-style questions
1 The definition of the watt comes from which equation?
(a) P = E/t
(b) P = Ext
(c) AW = Fas
(d) AW = FAscoso
[1]
[Total: 1]
2 A 305 g ball is thrown vertically upwards to reach a height
of 5.55 m. How much potential energy has it gained at that
height?
(a) 16.6J
(b) 16.6 kJ
(c) 1690
(d) 16600J
[Total: 1]
(b) The area swept out by one blade, as it turns through 360°,
is 6000 m2. Wind at a speed of 9ms passes the turbine.
(i) Show that the volume of air passing through this area
in 5 seconds is about 300 000 m
(ii) Calculate the mass of this air.
Density of air = 1.2 kg m-3
[2]
(iii) Calculate the kinetic energy of this mass of air. [2]
(iv) Betz's law states that a turbine cannot usefully transfer
more than 59% of the kinetic energy of the wind.
Use this law to find the maximum output of the wind
turbine.
[2]
(c) Suggest a reason why it is not possible to usefully transfer
100% of the kinetic energy of the wind.
[1]
(d) Suggest the limitations of using wind turbines to provide
power.
[2]
[Total: 13]
[1]
5 Champagne bottles are often opener by 'firing the cork out
of the bottle. The world record for the horizontal distance
travelled by a fired cork is 53 m.
3 A horse pulls a carriage of weight 5600 N with a force of 80 N
N
for a distance of 1.2 km around New York's Central Park.
How much work is done by the horse?
(a) 6.7 kJ
(b) 96 kJ
(c) 538 kJ
(d) 6720 kJ
[Total: 1]
[1]
4 The photograph shows a wind turbine. Kinetic energy of the
wind is transferred to electrical energy as the turbine blades
rotate.
AAN
[2]
The high pressure inside the bottle produces an average force
of 150 N on the cork as it leaves the bottle. This force acts on
the cork over a distance of 2.5 x 10-2 m.
(a) Show that the work done on the cork is about 4J.
(b) Calculate the maximum speed at which the cork could
leave the bottle.
mass of cork = 7.5 x 10-3kg
(c) The cork is fired from ground level at an angle of 40° to the
horizontal with a speed of 32 ms-1.
(i) Show that the vertical component of the velocity is
about 20 ms.
[1]
(ii) Calculate the horizontal distance travelled by the cork
through the air
[5]
(d) Suggest an explanation for the difference between your
calculated value and the world record distance.
[Total: 12]
(a) Explain why we can say that the wind is doing work on the
blades.
[2]
50
Thinking Bigger
2.2
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the booklet.
10000000000000
1. The extract opposite is from a book to teach hockey coaches the theory behind the
sport, especially for reference in A level PE lessons, which have a significant theory
element in various areas. Consider the extract and comment on the type of writing that
is used. Try and answer the following questions:
a. How has the author maintained the relevance of the calculations for the reader?
b. Discuss the level of difficulty of the calculations done, with reference to the target
audience and the purpose of the text.
Think about how the
complexity and level
of difficulty of these
calculations compared
with those that you
have to do in this
physics course. Also
consider that the
numbers used in the
examples are for elite
players - what level
of player are these
coaches likely to be
dealing with?
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics earlier in
this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the
answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work in context with what
you have already learned in your course.
656730001000009
2. Identify, and comment on the validity of the assumptions that have been made in these
calculations.
3. A penalty stroke is flicked from a distance of 6.40 m from the goal line. The striker scoops
it so that the ball leaves the ground at a 45° angle and a speed of 8 msl. How long does
the goalkeeper have to make a save before the ball crosses the goal line?
4. The study of mechanics in sport is a popular and often profitable new area of scientific
study.
a. Describe how a sports scientist could use ICT to collect data to study the movement
of players and equipment over time.
b. Explain why technological developments have made the data collected more valid
and reliable than with traditional methods of studying mechanics.
Command word
If you are asked to
describe something, you
need to give a clear and
concise account of it.
Pull out all the important
pieces of information as
a starting point.
Activity
0000000000000
Indoor hockey rules do not permit hitting the ball, it may only be 'pushed, flicked or scooped'. This
increases the time that the stick is in contact with the ball (to as much as 0.12 s) but reduces the force
applied (to at most 55 N). However, the pitch is smaller indoors, and the shooting circle is only 9.0m
from the goal. Write a similar section for a new version of this coaching manual which is aimed at
indoor hockey coaches.
The equipment used
is identical in both
versions of the sport:
ball mass and size,
stick materials and
sizes, goalkeeping
equipment etc.
• From Hockey is Mad Easy, a booklet aimed at new coaches, particularly teachers who may also need
to teach A level PE
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4.
49
Energy
2.2
Conversion between E, and Ek
The principle of conservation of energy tells us that we can never lose any energy or gain energy out
of nowhere. In any energy transfer, we must have the same total energy before and after the transfer.
Gravitational potential energy can be converted into kinetic energy if an object falls to a lower height.
Alternatively, an object thrown upwards will slow down as its kinetic energy is transformed into gpe.
In either case:
AE = mgAh = į mv2 = Ek
Depending on the situation, it can often be useful to divide out the mass that appears on both sides
of this equation. This allows a convenient calculation of how fast an object will be travelling after
falling a certain distance from rest:
v = 2gAh
or how high an object could rise if projected upwards at a certain speed:
Ah = ?
29
WP
Learning tip
The fact that mass divides out to give the relationship v = 2gh confirms Galileo's idea that
objects will all fall to the ground at the same rate regardless of their mass.
However, remember that all of the relationships shown in this section assume that no energy is lost
through friction or air resistance, and that this can be an important factor when some objects fall.
fig C A penny falls from Nelson's Column.
For example, how fast would a penny hit the ground if it were dropped from the top of Nelson's
Column, which is 52 m tall?
v = 25Ah
V = 2(9.81 52) = 1020
V = 31.9 ms1
Another example: how high would water from a fountain rise if it were ejected vertically upwards
from a spout at 13.5 ms-!?
Ah = 28
Ab - 13.52
2(9.81)
Ah = 9.29 m
182.25
19.62
fig D Fountain designers need to
be able to calculate gpe and
kinetic energy
43
