10.
12
Here, a plot of In Non the y-axis against t on the x-axis will also be a straight line with a negative
gradient, which is equal in magnitude to the decay constant, . The y-intercept in this case will be the
natural logarithm value of the initial number of nuclei.
In either case, the gradient gives the decay constant, from which we can find the half-life from:
6.5X
In A
6+
5.5+
5+
4.5+
250
300
3.5+
3+
0 50 100 150 200
Time/s
fig D Logarithmic graphical analysis of protactinium-234m decay data.
Questions
Calculate the decay constants for the following isotopes that are commonly used in school laboratories:
(a) radium-226: half-life = 1602 years
(b) strontium-90: half-life = 28.8 years
(c) cobalt-60: half-life = 5.3 years.
If the cellar in a house in Cornwall contained 6.5 billion atoms of radon-222 gas, with a decay constant
= 2.10 x 10-65-1, how many radon gas atoms would there be one day later?
3
Technetium-99m is a gamma emitter which is often used as a medical tracer to monitor lymph node
activity. Use the graph of experimental results shown in fig E to work out the half-life of technetium-99m.
4000
3500
3000-
2500
Activity/Bq
520004
ELETTER
Time/hours
fig E Radioactive decay of technetium-99m.
4
Explain why a radioactive isotope with a very small decay constant will have a long half-life.
5
Find the half-life of protactinium from the logarithmic graph on fig D.
Kev definitions
A decay constant is the probability, per second, that a given nucleus will decay.
Activity is the number of radioactive decays in unit time.
Half-life is the time taken for half of the atoms of a nuclide within a sample to decay. Alternatively, the
time taken for the activity of a sample of a radioactive nuclide to reduce to half its initial value.
150
Radioactivity
10.1
Investigation
WP
Investigating radioactive decay rates
You may have the equipment to measure the half-life for a
radioactive sample, as shown in fig A. If you do not, a simulation in
which dice represent the radioactive nuclei can demonstrate the
exponential decay of a sample (fig B).
we use the graph to find the time taken for the count to drop to
400 Bq, which is 70 seconds. Doing this a second time, from a
count rate of 400 Bq to a count rate of 200 Bq, gives a time of
80 seconds. Notice that the time interval is not identical each
time. This is due to the random nature of radioactive decay, plus
experimental and graphing errors. The best-fit curve will be a
matter of the drawer's judgement. Thus, to get the best answer for
the half-life, we must undertake the analysis on the graph several
times in different parts of the graph and average the results.
From the two half-lives shown in fig C, the average half-life for
protactinium-234m would be 75 seconds.
1000
Activity/Bq
fig A Measuring the half-life of protactinium-234m.
250
300
0+
© 50 100 150 200
Time/seconds
fig C Determining half-life graphically
ota
S
fig B Measuring the half-life of dice.
Half-life graphs
An experiment to determine the half-life of a substance will
usually measure its activity over time. As activity is proportional to
the number of nuclei present, when the activity is plotted against
time, the shape of the curve is exponential decay (fig C). The
activity, A, follows the equation:
A = A.e-
We can use the graph of activity against time to determine the
half-life of the substance by finding the time taken for the activity
to halve.
To find the half-life from such a graph, find a useful start point on
the curve. In the example shown in fig C, this could be the start
point where the activity is 800 Bq. As the half-life is defined as
the time taken for the activity to fall to half of its original value,
Logarithmic half-life analysis
As we have seen in fig C, there are numerous graphical
uncertainties which could lead to unreliabilities in our conclusion
of the half-life for a sample under test. To improve on the curving
graph, we can analyse the experimental data to generate a
straight-line graph so our best-fit line will be less uncertain.
Using either of our decay equations, taking the logarithm of the
equation will give us a new equation for the data that is in the
form y = mx + c.
Considering data from measuring the activity of a sample
over time:
A= A, et
In A = In A, -
: In A = - At+ In A.
So a plot of In A on the y-axis against t on the x-axis (fig D) will be
a straight line with a negative gradient equal in magnitude to the
decay constant, X. The y-intercept will be the natural logarithm
value of the initial activity.
Alternatively, if the experimental data is measuring number of
nuclei (often actually measured as mass):
N = Net
In N= In N, - At
In N= - *t + In N.
149
Exam-style questions
10.1
6 You are to plan an experiment to investigate the ability of
gamma rays to penetrate lead. You are then to analyse a set of
data from such an experiment.
(a) You have a source of radiation and a detector and counter.
Describe briefly a simple experiment to confirm that the
source emits gamma radiation.
[3]
(b) You are provided with sheets of lead and apparatus to
support them safely between the source and the detector.
The thickness of lead affects the count rate. Describe the
measurements you would make to investigate this.
Your description should include:
• a variable you will control to make it a fair investigation
• how you will make your results as accurate as possible
• one safety precaution.
[6]
(c) For gamma rays passing through lead of thickness x, the
count rate A is given by:
A= A, e-
where A, is the count rate when there is no lead between
source and detector, and is a constant.
Explain why a graph of In A against x should be a straight
line.
(d) The following data were obtained in such an investigation.
The background count was 40 minute-!.
x/mm measured count rate/minute-1
0
1002
6.30
739
12.74
553
19.04
394
25.44
304
31.74
232
Process the data as appropriate and then plot a
suitable graph to show that these data are consistent
with A = A, et
[5]
(e) Use your graph to determine a value for the constant . [2]
[Total: 17]
161
Thinking Bigger
10.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this article.
1. The extract consists of an article from a UK newspaper.
a. Comment on the style of the writing, in particular the quantity of paragraphs and level
of vocabulary used.
b. Give three reasons why the level of physics detail about the functioning of the new
nuclear power station is minimal in this article.
2. a. Nuclear Waste Advisory Associates, quoted in the article, has a publicly stated aim to
advise against the development of new nuclear power stations. How has the newspaper
attempted to give readers a balanced view of the issues raised by the article?
b. Explain how the article has presented a negative viewpoint on what the government
could claim was actually a positive outcome for the power station's development
Consider who is the
intended audience, and
what they would be most
interested in learning
about the new nuclear
plant.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
worry
3. a. Hinkley Point C is to be sited on the Somerset coast of the Bristol Channel. Why are
all nuclear power stations built near a large body of water?
b. Criticise the statement in the article that [Hinkley Point C] will heat up to six million
homes'.
4. Much of the debate about nuclear power station costs surrounds construction and
decommissioning, and radioactive waste management. Why is there little comment
about running costs?
5. Explain why there is a need for long-term radioactive waste management, how it might
be achieved, and why this might be expensive.
Think about the useful
and wasted energies that
will be produced in the
power station
vvvvwvwwny
Activity
Imagine you are writing a community newsletter about the progress of the construction of Hinkley
Point C. Rewrite the article above to put a positive spin on the outcomes of the meeting of the EU
Commission, including the funding of the power plant and the future of electricity generation in the UK.
Make sure that your article includes a balance of quotations, but aim to persuade the reader that the new
nuclear power plant is a very positive development
Think about how you could
structure the newsletter
to influence the reader's
opinion.
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1 YOU ARE 21.1
YOU ARE
HERE
12.1
13.1
159
10.1 Exam-style questions
[Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
(b) The concentration of 14C in living organisms might have
been greater in the past.
Explain how this would affect the age that you have
calculated.
[Total: 6]
[2]
1 In an experiment to test the penetrating power of alpha
particles, a Geiger-Müller counter was placed in front of the
source and registered 234 counts in three minutes. A 4cm
thick block of lead was placed between the source and the GM
counter and the count reduced to 26 counts in one minute.
What was the background radiation level?
A 0.433 Bq
B 0.866 Ba
C 1.30 Bq
D 1.73 Bq
[1]
[Total: 1]
5 Fission and fusion are both nuclear processes that release
energy. About 20% of the UK's energy need is currently
provided by the controlled fission of uranium. Intensive
research continues to harness the energy released from the
fusion of hydrogen.
(a) (i) Fission of uranium-235 takes place after the absorption
of a thermal neutron.
Assume such neutrons behave as an ideal gas at a
temperature of 310 K.
Show that the square root of the mean square speed of
the neutrons is about 3000 ms-1.
mass of neutron = 1.0087 u
(ii) Complete the equation for the fission of uranium-235.
[2]
2U + inU 138Cs + 4Rb + .....
(iii) Calculate the energy released in a single fission. Then
determine the rate of fission necessary to maintain
a power output of 2.5 GW.
Mass/u
[3]
2 One definition of the unified atomic mass unit has the value
of 1u as being equivalent to that of 1820 electrons. Using
this definition, if an electron's mass is converted entirely into
energy, how much energy would this be?
A 7.91 x 10-6 eV
B 0.513 MeV
C281eV
D 1700 000 MeV
[Total: 1]
[1]
235.0439
235U
138Cs
96 Rb
137.9110
95.9343
3 The half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. What is the decay
constant for a nucleus of carbon-14?
A 3.84 x 10-125
B 1.21 x 10-45-1
C 2.52 x 10-45-1
D 8268y!
[1]
[Total: 1]
4 All living organisms contain 12C and radioactive 14C. The
concentration of 14C in the organism is maintained whilst the
organism is alive, but starts to fall once death has occurred.
(a) The count rate obtained from wood from an old Viking
ship is 14.7 min-1 per gram of wood, after being corrected
for background radiation. The corrected count rate from
similar living wood is 16.5 min- per gram of wood.
Calculate the age of the ship in years.
14C has a half-life of 5700 years.
(b) *(i) State the conditions for fusion and go on to explain
why it has proved difficult to maintain a sustainable
reaction in a practical fusion reactor.
[4]
(ii) The nuclear reaction below represents the fusion of
two deuterium nuclei.
Complete the equation and identify particle X. [1]
2D + D + H+ X
(iii) Despite the difficulties, the quest for a practical fusion
reactor continues.
State two advantages fusion power might have over
fission power
[2]
[Total: 16]
160
Nuclear power stations WP
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
describe how the penetrating powers of radiations affect industrial application design
describe how the relative half-lives of different fission products affect risk assessments and
waste management
describe ways in which society uses science to inform decision making
Nuclear reactors
The most common nuclear fission reaction used in power stations is that of uranium-235. If a
nucleus of this uranium isotope is hit by a slow moving neutron, often called a thermal neutron, it
may absorb the neutron to form U-236, which is unstable and quickly breaks up. The products of this
disintegration will be two medium-sized (and radioactive) nuclei with roughly half the nucleons each,
plus a number of high speed neutrons. The actual composition of the two main products varies - the
vast majority of these fissions will produce a heavier daughter nucleus with mass numbers in the
range 130-150, whilst the lighter product usually has a mass number in the range 85-105.
There is a difference in the amount of binding energy in the U-236 and the daughter products. This is
given off as the kinetic energy of the various particles and harnessed by the nuclear reactor to drive
an electricity-generating system (fig A). A moderator, such as water or graphite, is used to slow
down the emitted neutrons, so that they arrive at the next uranium fuel rod at the slow speed needed
to allow them to be absorbed by further U-235 nuclei, to cause further fissions and continue the
reaction. As each reaction requires only one neutron but produces two or three, this chain reaction
could run out of control, as is the case in a nuclear bomb. To control the reaction in a nuclear reactor,
control rods typically made of cadmium or boron absorb excess neutrons (fig B). These control
rods are lowered into the reactor on an electromagnetic support. If there is a failure in the control
rods system, gravity will pull them completely down into the reactor core, where they will absorb all
neutrons and shut down the reaction.
Learning tip
The content in this section has
been included to illustrate how
different areas of physics can
be brought together in one
application to solve a problem.
It is not required by the
specification.
control rods -
steam
heat exchanger
graphite
moderator
water circulator
fuel
assemblies
Water
-gas circulator
concrete
pressure vessel and
radiation shielding
fig A Advanced Gas Cooled Reactor - a typical nuclear reactor design in the UK.
155
TOPIC 10
Nuclear radiation
CHAPTER
10.1 Radioactivity
Introduction
Radiation is scary stuff. At least, that is what most people believe. It is certainly true that when the Americans dropped
WP nuclear bombs on Japan in 1945, the Japanese suffered so many casualties that they surrendered within days. However,
there is radioactivity naturally all around us. Having a picnic on a rock in Dartmoor could easily expose you to more
radioactivity than undertaking experiments in school using radioactive sources. Coal-fired power stations release more
radioactivity to the environment, but nuclear power stations emit more radioactivity from their fuel. It is important to
understand the evidence relating to hazards in all areas of life, and as nuclear physics is poorly understood by the public, its
hazards are often overstated.
In this chapter, we will learn what radioactivity is, how it can be dangerous, and how these hazards can be reduced. We will also
see how the energy stored in the nuclei of atoms can be measured, where it comes from, and how it can be harnessed as a
power source.
All the maths you need
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. finding the mass in E = mc2)
• Use of exponential and logarithmic functions (e.g. solving for unknowns in the radioactive decay equation)
• Use of the principles of calculus (e.g. solving the rate of decay differential equation)
• Use of logarithmic graph plots (e.g. finding the half-life from experimental data from a linear log plot)
• Calculating surface areas (e.g. verifying the inverse square law for gamma ray intensity)
142
10.1
graphite moderator
slows neutrons
U-235
enery
U-235
boron-steel control rod
absorbs excess emitted
neutrons to control the
rate of reaction
energy
U-235
neutron
energy
fission
fragment
Recent global increased interest in nuclear power has caused the
potential longevity of reserves to be called into question. Considering
only the reserves that could be mined at a reasonable cost, and with
current usage (66 000 tonnes per year), reserves could run out in as
little as 90 years. As investment in uranium exploration has increased
significantly recently, new reserves have been discovered and the time
estimates improved. However, should there be any unexpected supply
problem (for example, the McArthur River mine in Canada, which
produces 13% of world supply, was flooded in 2003, which took it out
of action for three months), the precarious balance between supply
and demand would be highlighted
fig B A controlled nuclear fission chain reaction.
Nuclear power - the way forward?
In the UK, nuclear power went through periods of popularity in
the 1950s and 1980s, and our current fleet of 16 reactors produce
approximately 18% of UK electricity. Most of these power stations
are reaching the end of their lives, and few will be able to continue
operation after 2023. The increasing costs of fossil fuels, and the
need to reduce carbon emissions, has brought nuclear power back
into popularity with the government as an option for our future
production of electricity. Modern reactor design is far superior to
those early power stations, so they are much safer, but there are
still some important environmental concerns to be considered.
How does society choose to use nuclear power?
The first generation of nuclear power stations in the UK were built
and run by the government. Many of them have now been sold
to private energy companies, and politicians are currently keen to
have all future nuclear installations built and run privately. There is
an economic argument that this will increase efficiency within the
operation, and in the end this should make the electricity cheaper
for the consumer, even after allowing for the company's profits.
Few energy companies have been willing to risk the enormous
capital investment needed.
In recent years, public opinion in the UK, along with the viewpoint
of British industry (as represented by the Confederation of British
Industries (CBI)) and that of MPs, have all moved towards a more
positive stance on nuclear power.
The Health and Safety Executive has a department covering
nuclear installations and they implement various acts of parliament
governing the required safety procedures in such power stations.
An alternative non-renewable energy source
Radioactive materials which can supply energy through a
controlled nuclear fission reaction are not uncommon in the
Earth's crust - uranium is about 500 times more abundant than
gold. And in order to supply a standard size power station, such
fuels are only needed in very small quantities. 3 kg of uranium-235
per day will run a 1000 MW nuclear power station. Compare this
with the 9000 tonnes of coal per day which would be needed in
a coal-fired power station of the same output. Indeed, a million
tonnes of uranium-235 could supply the energy equivalent to
all the fossil fuels on Earth. There is estimated to be about six
times that quantity of uranium available. However, it is principally
located in only a handful of countries, with Australia, Russia and
Kazakhstan having over 50% of global reserves. This raises some
serious issues about the security of fuel supply for countries which
choose to use nuclear power.
Nuclear disasters
All industries have a risk of accidents occurring, and the potential
hazards must be balanced by the likelihood of their occurrence.
and the checks put in place to minimise this likelihood or limit the
potential damage. In the nuclear industry the hazards are extreme,
so the probability of accidents must be virtually eliminated. Only
two events have been classified as level 7 on the International
Nuclear Event Scale. Whilst reading about the nuclear disasters
below, consider the fact that in the USA, in 2014 alone, 16 coal
miners died in mining accidents.
Country
Australia
Kazakhstan
Russian Federation
Uranium reserves/tonnes
1700000
679 000
506 000
table A Uranium reserves of the top three countries, which hold 50% of the
world's known 5.9 Mt reserves (counted as those that could be mined
for less than US$130 per kilogram).
The Chernobyl explosion
Nuclear power poses an extreme potential hazard to health and
safety, as a major incident can destroy an entire landscape. In 1986,
a reactor explosion at Chernobyl in the Ukraine released about
156
101
Nuclear radiation
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
describe what is meant by background radiation and explain how to take appropriate account of it
explain the relationship between the structure of alpha, beta and gamma radiations, and their
penetrating and ionising abilities
write and interpret nuclear equations
Background radiation
Human beings can survive small doses of nuclear radiation relatively unscathed. This has been
important in our evolution, as the natural environment incorporates low levels of radiation from
natural sources. This is called background radiation. In the UK it averages to less than one
radioactive particle every two seconds in any given place (fig A). If we measure background
radiation using a Geiger-Müller (G-M) tube, the number of counts per second usually ranges from
0.2-0.5 depending on exact location. Radiation levels are often reported in counts per second, and
this unit is called the becquerel (Ba) after Henri Becquerel, the French physicist credited with the
discovery of spontaneous radiation in 1896.
(a)
radiation dose/Bq year-1
0.3-0.4
nuclear power
and weapons
0.3%
0.25–0.3
other
0.2%
0.2-0.25
cosmic rays
10.0%
<0.2
food and drink
11.5%
medical -
14.0%
ground and buildings
14.0%
radon gas
50.0%
fig A The environment continually exposes us to low levels of nuclear radiation. (a) Levels of background radiation dose
in Great Britain (measured in Bq - a unit for measuring radiation energy delivered to the body); (b) Sources of
background radiation.
144
THINKING
BIGGER
NEW NUCLEAR POWER IN THE UK W
The UK has a long-established nuclear power industry for contributing electricity to the National
Grid. Many of the older power stations are coming to the end of their lives, and the government has
given approval for some replacements to be built, but the costs are controversial.
TREASURY REBUKED BY EU OVER HIDDEN
NUCLEAR COSTS
Buried deep in commission minutes from 8 October is an
admission that there was 'regret, expressed by some, that all the
long-term costs for the British Treasury had not been integrated
into the calculation of the cost of the project, for instance the cost
of storing the nuclear waste or of dismantling the plant at the end
of its lifetime'.
This meeting involved 22 members of the Commission, led by the
president, Jose Manuel Barroso, and including the vice-president,
Baroness Ashton, from the UK.
Despite the rebuke, they concluded that state aid for the plant,
which will heat up to six million homes when it is built by 2023,
would not have any negative impact on the functioning of the
market".
fig A Artist's impression of Hinkley Point C nuclear power station.
Chancellor George Osborne has been criticised by the European
Commission for failing to reveal all the costs associated with
building the UK's first nuclear power station since the 1990s.
The commission approved the construction of Hinkley Point C
on the Somerset coast earlier this month following a state aid
investigation.
The Government has agreed that owner EDF would be guaranteed
a minimum fee for the electricity produced there, known as the
strike price, so that shareholders in the French operator knew they
would get a return on the £16bn cost of building the plant.
However, some members of the Commission were critical that
the Government has consistently failed to include other long-term
costs when valuing Hinkley Point C, the first of a planned fleet of
new nuclear reactors that are expected to reduce household bills
by £95 in 2030.
Dr David Lowry, a research consultant and member of Nuclear
Waste Advisory Associates, warned that nuclear costs 'always
escalate' and added: "When ministers and political atomic
aficionados back the nuclear industry's claims that they
have covered all future costs for long-term radioactive waste
management, they have fallen into a clever trap.'
A Treasury spokesman said: "With respect to the decommissioning
and storage costs the situation is that [EDF subsidiary] NNBG are
responsible for these long-term costs (through their investment in a
Funded Decommissioning Plan), and these costs are all included in
the agreed strike price. It is a pity that the minutes do not reflect this.
As well as being responsible for their costs in cleaning up of the
site, NNBG will pay HM Government for the radioactive waste
transferred to HM Government for long-term storage."
• Treasury rebuked by EU over hidden nuclear costs" by M. Leftley,
i newspaper, 27/10/2014, page 43, with permission from The Independent,
www.independent.co.uk.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1
6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
158
Radioactivity
10.1
5% of the reactor core material into the atmosphere. Up to 2004,
there had been 56 fatalities which could be directly attributed to
this disaster, 28 of these occurring within a few weeks from acute
radiation exposure. Large areas of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus
were contarninated, and 336 000 people have been resettled
elsewhere. There will be an ongoing (small) increased incidence
of cancer amongst the 'liquidators' - the half million people from
all over the Soviet Union who worked on the clean-up operation
in the two years after the explosion. However, the World Health
Organisation, International Atomic Energy Agency and United
Nations have all undertaken investigations and their reports on the
region's population are in agreement that the actual harmful effects
have been considerably overestimated. The most harmful isotopes
released decayed quite quickly, leaving the area with a background
radiation which is at present about 50% higher than normal. There
were four reactors at Chernobyl, and the other three continued
to operate for many years afterwards. Reactor number 4 was
encased in a concrete shield very soon afterwards, and this is to be
enhanced by a more permanent shelter to be completed in 2017.
Nuclear power legacies
Nuclear fission of uranium produces a variety of daughter products
which are also radioactive, with varying half-lives. This spent fuel
is the most dangerous of the radioactive wastes generated in the
process. The material of the reactor core's construction will also
become slightly radioactive during the course of its lifetime, mostly
through exposure to free neutrons which can be absorbed by a
nucleus, turning it into an unstable, radioactive isotope. This means
that the production of radioactive waste from a nuclear power station
occurs throughout its lifetime and then the decommissioning process
at the end of the useful lifetime will generate about the same amount
of waste again (table B). The projected cost for decommissioning all
of the nuclear power stations in Britain is over £70 billion.
Questions
| List all the factors that should be taken into consideration when
deciding whether or not to build new nuclear power stations.
2 Carry out some research to find out the methods for disposing of
high, medium and low level radioactive wastes.
Explain why a mechanical system using levers moved by hand would be
inappropriate for use to lower the control rods into a nuclear reactor.
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident
On 11 March 2011, Japan was hit by a massive earthquake
(magnitude 9.0). This generated a 14-metre tsunami wave that hit
the Fukushima nuclear power plant on Japan's east coast. This
destroyed the cooling system for three of the plant's six reactors.
These suffered meltdown and released significant amounts
of radioactive material over three days shortly afterwards. No
fatalities were directly attributable to this accident, but as a
result of the evacuation of over 100 000 people, more than 1000
deaths occurred. The World Health Organisation estimated very
small increased risk of cancers in later life if the population had
remained in the affected areas. Whilst the clean-up process will
take decades, the safety procedures in place significantly limited
the hazard generated by this incident.
Calculate the percentage of world uranium reserves held by each of
Australia, Kazakhstan and Russia (table A).
5
Write a short editorial piece for a local newspaper, outlining
your views about nuclear power generation in the UK, and the
implications for your local area.
Key definitions
A thermal neutron is a relatively slow-moving neutron.
A moderator is a material used in a nuclear reactor to slow fast-
moving neutrons to thermal speeds.
A fuel rod within a nuclear reactor is a rod containing the fissionable
material, e.g. uranium-235.
A chain reaction is a self-sustaining nuclear reaction in which the
products from one individual fission reaction go on to trigger one or
more further fissions.
Control rods within a nuclear reactor are made of materials that can
absorb neutrons to stop the triggering of further fission reactions,
e.g. boron.
fig C The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant suffered serious damage
following an earthquake and tsunami on 11 March 2011.
Waste level Types of material
Sources
Treatment
Volume percentage Activity percentage
of global waste (%) of global waste (%)
high
3
95
heavy metals, spent fuel, fuel
fuel rods
reprocessing
products
resins, chemical
reactor
sludges, reactor | decommissioning
components
paper, rags, tools, hospitals,
clothing, filters laboratories, industry
cooled in a water pool for
1-20 years, then buried in a
deep underground repository
solidified in concrete or
bitumen and buried
intermediate
low
incinerated and buried
table B Radioactive waste levels and their treatments.
157
What have I studied before?
The structure of an atom
• Particle energies
The conservation of energy
• Rutherford's alpha particle scattering experiment
lonisation
Photon emission from excited electrons
What will I study later?
How gravitational forces follow an inverse square
relationship
How nuclear fusion reactions power stars
Gamma ray bursts from supernova explosions
The production of the heaviest elements in
supernovae
What will I study in this chapter?
• The different types of radioactive emissions
• Mass defect and binding energy
• The importance of binding energy per nucleon
• Nuclear fission and nuclear fusion
• Nuclear reactions
The random nature of radioactive decay, and
radioactive half-life
143
Radioactivity
10.1
Investigation
WP
Investigating lead absorption of gamma radiation
Using the same experimental set-up as shown in fig B, we can find out how much lead is needed to reduce
the intensity of gamma radiation by a certain amount. Using a radioactive source that emits alpha and
gamma only, we can select to study the gamma radiation by placing a sheet of paper in front of the source to
absorb all the alpha particles. This will have no measurable effect on the gamma emissions.
Keeping the distance from the source to the G-M tube constant, we can place varying thicknesses of lead
plate in the gap between them. For each thickness, record the count over a fixed time period and
determine the corrected count rate. There is a mathematical relationship between the corrected count
rate (which represents intensity of the radiation, 1) and the thickness, x, of lead. Can you work out what
graph to draw to prove that I e-HX?
Make sure you have a good understanding of this practical as your understanding of the experimental
method may be assessed in your examinations.
Dangers from nuclear radiations
Ionising radiations can interact with the particles that make up human cells. There may be so much
ionisation that the cells die as a result. Where there is less ionisation, the molecules of DNA in the
cells may change slightly. These DNA mutations can cause cells to have an increased tendency to
become cancerous. As the different types of nuclear radiation ionise to different extents, the hazard
to humans is different for each type. The hazard levels are given in table A.
Type of radiation Inside body
Outside body
alpha, a
| Highly ionising - very dangerous: Absorbed by surface layer of dead
radiation poisoning and cancer possible. skin cells - no danger.
beta, 8
Moderate ionisation and danger: Moderate ionisation and danger:
exposure should be minimised.
close exposure should be minimised.
gamma, 7
Minimal ionisation - cancer danger Minimal ionisation - cancer danger
from long-term exposure.
from long-term exposure.
table A Hazards from nuclear radiations. Not considered here is the fact that different tissue types can be more or less
susceptible to these dangers.
Questions
| Create a table summarising everything you know about alpha, beta and gamma radiations.
In preparation for an experiment using a radioactive sample, Xian measured the radioactivity in her
laboratory without the sample present. In one hour, her Geiger-Müller tube measured 1645 counts.
What was the background count in becquerel?
3 Why is it theoretically safe to hold a sample which emits only alpha radiation? Why should you still never do so?
Why might the UK government list 'living in Cornwall' as one of the most (radiologically) hazardous
activities that the public can undertake?
It is thought that some soil could be contaminated with a radioisotope. You have a sample of this soil.
Describe an experiment to determine what types of radiation are emitted.
Key definitions
Background radiation is low levels of radiation from environmental sources, always present around us.
Decay ('nuclear' or 'radioactive') is a process in which a nucleus's structure is changed, usually
accompanied by the emission of a particle.
Alpha particles are composed of two protons and two neutrons, the same as a helium nucleus.
A beta particle is an electron emitted at high speed from the nucleus when a neutron decays into a proton.
Gamma rays are high energy, high frequency, electromagnetic radiation, emitted from a nuclear
radioactive decay.
147
Radioactivity
10.1
Stage 1: two protons fuse.
Stage 2: one proton changes into
a neutron, as in beta-plus decay.
to leave a deuterium nucleus.
w
ww.
Man-made fusion reactions
Nuclear fusion as an energy source for us to generate electricity is
currently only at a research stage. The Joint European Torus (JET)
experiment in Oxfordshire is a research facility which investigated
sustained nuclear fusion reactions. After 25 extremely expensive
years of tests on confining and controlling burning plasmas',
the main JET experiment was recently upgraded to provide
demonstration and developmental support for the ITER project
(International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor), which is
JET's successor. This is a truly international project, whereas JET
was a European-funded experiment. The costs were becoming
too much for the European Union to bear alone, and although
the ITER will be sited in France, six other large nations (India,
China, Russia, USA, Korea and Japan) will also contribute towards
the 15 billion Euros construction cost. An estimated 10 years
of construction began in 2010, and when ITER is complete, the
aim is to generate temperatures of 150 million kelvin in a plasma
volume of 840 cubic metres, nearly ten times larger than JET was.
Stage 3: another proton joins on
making a nucleus of He-3.
Stage 4: two He-3 nuclei fuse.
Stage 5: two protons break off
leaving an He-4 nucleus.
fig C The proton-proton nuclear fusion reaction, typical in small cool stars
such as our Sun, where the core temperature is about 15 x 106K
WORKED EXAMPLE
Nuclear fission
We have seen that nuclear fusion is not yet an option for electricity
generation, as we have not been able to create the high densities
and temperatures needed to sustain a fusion reaction. However,
another process which releases binding energy from nuclei is
called nuclear fission. In this process a large nucleus breaks
up into two smaller nuclei, with the release of some neutrons
and energy (fig D). Fission reactions can be triggered when the
nucleus absorbs another particle making it unstable. Uranium-235
can absorb slow-moving neutrons to become the unstable isotope
U-236.
U-235
Kr-92
The proton-proton chain nuclear fusion reaction effectively takes
four protons and converts them into a helium-4 nucleus and two
positrons (which have the same mass as electrons). Calculate the
energy released in this reaction.
The measured atomic mass of 'He is 4.002 602 u.
Mass of 4 protons = 4 x 1.007 276u
= 4.029 104
Mass of 'He nucleus + 2 positrons
= (4.002 602 - 2 0.000 548 58) u + (2 0.000 548 58)
= 4.002 602 u
Mass deficit = 4.029 1040 - 4.002 602 u
= 0.0265 u
= 24.7 MeV
U-236
fast
neutrons
slow neutron
These reactions occurring in enormous numbers provide
the energy which causes the Sun to emit heat and light in all
directions in great quantities.
Converting hydrogen into helium with the release of energy would
appear to be a fantastic way of supplying the planet's energy needs.
The seas are full of hydrogen in water molecules, and the helium
produced would be an inert gas which could simply be allowed to
float off into the upper atmosphere. However, scientists have not
yet successfully maintained a controlled nuclear fusion reaction.
The problem lies in forcing two positively charged, mutually
repelling, protons to fuse together. The kinetic energy they need
to have to collide forcefully enough to overcome this electrostatic
repulsion requires temperatures of many million kelvin. Moreover,
to ensure enough colliding protons for the reaction to be sustained
requires a very high density of them. Comparing the energy output
with nuclear fission below. 235 grammes of hydrogen undergoing
nuclear fusion would produce an energy output of 1.40 x 1014 J.
Ba-142
fig D Nuclear fission of uranium-235.
153
10.
13
fig E A Fat Man plutonium fission bomb.
Questions
WORKED EXAMPLE
Although there are a variety of possible products from nuclear
fission reactions, the amount of energy released in each one is
roughly similar at about 200 MeV.
Calculate the energy released in the following fission reaction:
235U + n 141Ba + 92 Kr + 3n + energy
(Data: mass of U-235 = 235.0439 u; mass of Ba-141 = 140.9144 u;
mass of Kr-92 = 91.9262 u.)
Mass difference: Am
= 235.0439 +1.008665 - 140.9144 - 91.9262 - 3(1.008665)
= 0.1860 u
Energy released: E = 0.1860 x 931.5
= 173 Mev
= 2.77 x 10-11]
This is the energy per fission. If one mole of these were to occur,
using 235 g of U-235, then the total energy produced would be:
E = 6.02 x 1023 x 2.77 x 10-11
= 1.67 x 1013]
However, U-235 is a small proportion (0.7%) of all the uranium
found, and thus a larger amount of uranium fuel would be needed in
order to provide enough U-235 atoms to produce this much energy
What are the changes in binding energy per nucleon in the
above reaction?
(Data: binding energy of U-235 = 1786 MeV; binding energy of
Ba-141 = 1170 MeV; binding energy of Kr-92 = 782 MeV.)
Find the binding energies per nucleon:
11-235. 1700 - 76 Mev
Use the data in table A to work out how much energy could be
produced if a proton, neutron and electron were each completely
converted into energy.
The atomic mass unit used to be different between physics and
chemistry until the system was unified in the 1960s. Previously, in
Physics, it was based on the mass of an atom of oxygen-16, which is
15.994 915 u (now). Using the modern values, calculate the binding
energy of a nucleus of oxygen-16.
Inside large mass stars, fusion of heavier elements than in the
proton-proton cycle can occur. At about 10K, helium-4 nuclei will
fuse into carbon-12 nuclei according to the equation:
He2+ + He2+ + 'He2+ = 1206+
(a) Calculate the energy released in this reaction.
(b) How does the binding energy per nucleon change in the reaction?
(c) What is the average kinetic energy and rms speed of the helium
nuclei in the star?
235
Ba-141:
141
= 8.3 MeV
707
4
Kr-92: 82 = 8.5 MeV
So the two fission products each have a higher binding energy per
nucleon than the original uranium nuclide.
Complete the following nuclear fission reaction to determine X:
235U + n - XRb + 139Cs + 2n + energy
Calculate the amount of energy, in joules, generated from 2 kg of
uranium fuel, if the U-235 represents 0.7% of the metal and every
fission reaction produces 200 MeV.
Did you know?
6
Calculate the energy released in one fission in the following reaction:
235U + n-94Zr + 139 Te + 3n + energy
(Data: mass of Zr-94 = 93.9063 u; mass of Te-139 = 138.9347 u.)
Explain, in terms of binding energy per nucleon, why nuclear fusion
and nuclear fission can release energy.
Nuclear bombs
The neutrons in controlled nuclear fission reactions are slowed to speeds
needed to sustain fission using a moderator (see Section 10.1.4). However,
some nuclear fission reactions, such as those using plutonium, will
progress by reacting with high speed neutrons, meaning that a moderator
is not required. If such a reaction were allowed to run uncontrolled, it
would produce energy continuously, at an ever-increasing rate, until all
the fuel were used up. This is the essential concept behind the design of
nuclear bombs. A lump of plutonium-239 about the size of a cricket ball
can completely react in less than a microsecond, releasing the energy
equivalent of 20 kilotonnes of TNT, about 90 x 1012).
This type of bomb was dropped on the city of Nagasaki in Japan during
the Second World War (fig E). It killed 40 000 people immediately, and a
similar number had died from after-effects by the end of 1945. The
atomic bombings in Japan were so devastating that the country
surrendered to the allies just six days after the Nagasaki bomb, and
since the 1960s the Japanese government has resolved never to allow
Japan to hold nuclear weapons.
Kev definitions
A mass deficit is the difference between the measured mass of a
nucleus and the sum total of the masses of its constituent nucleons.
Mass defect is an alternative phrase for 'mass deficit.
Binding energy is the energy used to hold the nucleus together,
converted from the mass deficit, following E = mc2.
Fusion happens when small nuclides combine together to make
larger nuclei, releasing energy.
Fission happens when larger nuclei are broken up into smaller nuclides,
releasing energy
154
101
Rate of radioactive decay
WORKED EXAMPLE
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
describe the spontaneous and random nature of radioactive
decay
determine half-lives of isotopes graphically
If our sample of 100 billion carbon-14 atoms were left for 300
years, how many carbon-14 atoms would remain?
time, t = 300 x 365 x 24 x 60 x 60 = 9.46 x 10's
N = N, et
At = (3.84 x 10-12) (9.46 * 10) = 0.0363
N = (100 x 109) e-0.0363
N=9.64 x 1010 atoms
use the equations for rate of radioactive decay, and their
logarithmic equivalents
Learning tin
The exponential mathematics that govern radioactive decay is
identical in structure to those for the discharge of capacitors, which
we saw in Section 7.2.3.
Half life
Probability and decay
Since radioactive decay is a spontaneous and random process, any
radioactive nucleus may decay at any moment. For each second
that it exists, there is a certain probability that the nucleus will decay.
This probability is called the decay constant, A. However, just
like guessing which number will come up next in a lottery, it is not
possible to predict when any given nucleus will decay. The likelihood
that a particular nucleus will decay is not affected by factors outside
the nucleus, such as temperature or pressure, or by the behaviour of
neighbouring nuclei - each nucleus decays entirely independently.
If we have a large sample of the nuclei, the probability of decay will
determine the fraction of these nuclei that will decay each second.
Naturally, if the sample is larger, then the number that decay in a
second will be greater. So the number decaying per second, called
the activity, A (or ), is proportional to the number of nuclei in
the sample, N. Mathematically, this is expressed as:
A= -XN
As we have seen, the activity of a radioactive sample decreases
over time as the radioactive nuclei decay, leaving fewer radioactive
nuclei available to decay. While the activity of a sample depends
on the number of nuclei present, the rate at which the activity
decreases depends only on the particular isotope. A measure of
this rate of decrease of activity is the half-life, 1. This is the time
taken for half of the atoms of that nuclide within a sample to
decay.
Mathematically, the half-life can be found by putting N= N, into
the decay equation:
N= No e-
No
N = -XN
2 = N, e-
dt
The minus sign in this formula occurs because the number of
nuclei in the sample, N, decreases with time. In practice we ignore
the negative sign when using the formula.
WORKED EXAMPLE
The decay constant for carbon-14 is A = 3.84 x 10-12 5-1. What is
the activity of a sample of 100 billion atoms of carbon-14?
1 = e-
In ()=-*
-In 2 =-
dN-AN
= In 2
Rearranging this also gives us:
dN
= -(3.84 x 10-12) (100 x 10) = 0.384 Bq
1_ In 2
WORKED EXAMPLE
dy
The formula for the rate of decay of nuclei in a sample is a
differential equation. We have previously met this type of equation
when studying the discharge of a capacitor. The equation
= -XN can be solved to give a formula for the number of
dt
nuclei remaining in a sample, N, after a certain time, t.
N = N, e-
where N is the initial number of nuclei within a sample.
What is the half-life of carbon-14?
X = 3.84 x 10-125-1
In 2
?
In 2
143.84 x 10-12
t1 = 1.81 x 1011s = 5720 years
148
10.
13
Nuclear binding energy
The mass deficit comes about because a small amount of the
mass of the nucleons is converted into the energy needed to
hold the nucleus together. This is called binding energy. It is
calculated using Einstein's mass-energy relationship:
AE = Am
WORKED EXAMPLE
Does helium-4 or carbon-12 have the higher binding energy per
nucleon?
where c is the speed of light,
There are two common systems of units for calculating binding
energy. If you have calculated the mass deficit in kilograms
(SI units) then using c = 3.00 x 108ms will give the binding
energy in joules. Alternatively, if you have calculated the mass
deficit in atomic mass units, then you convert this into binding
energy in mega-electronvolts (MeV) using:
lu=931.5 MeV
WORKED EXAMPLE
The binding energy of helium-4 is 28.3 MeV, and it contains
4 nucleons:
binding energy per nucleon = 2,3 = 7.08 Mev
The binding energy for carbon-12 is 92.2 MeV, and it contains
12 nucleons:
binding energy per nucleon = 72 = 7.68 Mev
So, carbon-12 nuclei are more tightly bound together than those
of helium-4
Drawing a graph of binding energy per nucleon against mass
number for the nuclei gives us a useful means of comparing how
tightly different nuclides are bound together.
Fe
Calculate the binding energy for a carbon-12 nucleus in both
joules and electronvolts.
Working in kilograms, from fig A:
Am = 1.642354 x 10-28 kg
AE = c-Am
= (3 x 108)2 x (1.642 354 x 10-28)
= 1.478 x 10-11)
Converting to electronvolts:
AF - 1.478 x 10-11
1.6 x 10-19
= 9.226 107eV
= 92.3 Mev
Binding energy per nucleon/MeV
UTIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
0
50
100
150
200
Mass number/A
fig B Graph of binding energy per nucleon against mass number, A.
Alternatively, working in atomic mass units, from fig A:
Am = 0.098 937 u
AE = 931.5 x Am
= 931.5 0.098 937
= 922 MeV
Note that in calculations of both mass deficit and binding energy,
you need to use as many significant figures as possible, only
rounding off at the very end of the calculation. The difference in
our two answers here has come from rounding off the binding
energy answer in joules.
Looking at fig B, you will see that the isotope with the highest
binding energy per nucleon is iron-56 at 8.8 MeV per nucleon.
Any nuclear reaction which increases the binding energy per
nucleon will give out energy.
The graph shows us that small nuclides can combine together to
make larger nuclei (up to Fe-56) with a greater binding energy per
nucleon. This process is called nuclear fusion. Similarly, larger
nuclei can break up into smaller pieces which have a greater
binding energy per nucleon than the original nucleus. Reactions
like this are called nuclear fission. Both of these types of nuclear
reaction will give out energy, and could be used as power sources.
Binding energy per nucleon
How much energy would be needed to remove one nucleon from
a nucleus? To work this out we need to know both the binding
energy of a nucleus, and the number of nucleons within it. This
gives us the binding energy per nucleon in a nucleus in MeV, and
from this we can determine how strongly different nuclei are held
together
Nuclear fusion
If we take some light nuclei and force them to join together, the
mass of the new heavier nucleus will be less than the mass of
the constituent parts, as some mass is converted into energy.
However, not all of this energy is used as binding energy for the
new larger nucleus, so energy will be released from this reaction.
The binding energy per nucleon afterwards is higher than at the
start. This is the process of nuclear fusion and is what provides the
energy to make stars shine (fig C).
152
10.
11
Beta decay
A beta particle is an electron emitted at high speed from the nucleus when a neutron decays into a
proton. With its single negative charge and much smaller size, the beta particle is much less ionising
than an alpha particle, and thus can penetrate much further. Several metres of air, or a thin sheet of
aluminium, are needed to absorb beta particles.
Example beta decay equation:
1C — "N+-18 +
A neutron changes into
a proton and an electron,
+
+
+
beta
particle
unstable carbon-14
nucleus
fig D Beta-minus particle emission.
nitrogen
nucleus
Gamma decay
Gamma rays are high energy, high frequency, electromagnetic radiation. These photons have no
charge and no mass and so will rarely interact with particles in their path, which means they are the
least ionising nuclear radiation. They are never completely absorbed, although their energy can be
significantly reduced by several centimetres of lead or several metres of concrete. If the energy is
reduced to a safe level, gamma rays are often said to have been absorbed.
Example gamma decay equation:
Ni-m Ni +
gamma ray
fig E Gamma ray emission. The image shows only the gamma emission from an excited nickel nucleus, Ni-ma moment
after a beta particle was emitted from a cobalt-60 nucleus.
Gamma ray emission does not alter the structure of a nucleus emitting it but carries away energy, so
the nucleus must drop energy level in order to emit the gamma ray. This most commonly happens
immediately after alpha or beta decay, which leaves the nucleus in an excited state. The emission of
the gamma ray photon and associated de-excitation of the nucleus is exactly the same as we saw
in Book 1, Section 5.4.4 for the production of visible light, but involving nuclear energy states not
electrons. The difference is that the amount of energy involved is many times higher, so this produces
much higher frequency gamma radiation.
146
Radioactivity
10.1
The three main types of nuclear radiation are called alpha (a),
beta () and gamma (7) radiation. Each one comes about
through a different process within the nucleus, each one is
composed of different particles, and each one has different
properties.
The actual exposure to nuclear radiations that any individual will
receive from their environment will depend on where they are and
for how long, as different environmental factors contribute to the
local level of background radiation. On Earth, approximately half
of the background radiation is from naturally radioactive gases
in the atmosphere, particularly radon. Radon is produced in the
decay of uranium ore present in certain rocks (especially granite)
and thus is more prevalent in certain parts of the world than
others. In Cornwall in the UK, some houses are fitted with radon
detectors and special ventilation systems to flush out excess radon
gas from the household atmosphere.
Investigation
WP
Investigating radiation penetration
You can investigate the penetrating power of alpha, beta and gamma
radiation using a Geiger-Müller tube to detect them. Between the
source and the G-M tube, place absorber sheets that progressively
increase in density, and measure the average count rate. This
investigation is often simulated using computer software. This
removes all risk of exposure to radiological hazards (see below).
Did you know?
The most naturally radioactive place on Earth is Ramsar, in Iran,
where the dosage can be more than 200 times the natural dose rate
in the UK
datalogging computer
recording counts
absorbing
material
G-M tube
radioactive
Source
TAP
568
Investigation
Investigating background radiation
It is easy to determine the average background radiation in your area
using a Geiger-Müller tube and counter. As radioactive decay is a
random and spontaneous process, the activity in your lab must be
measured over a long period of time (30 minutes or more) and then an
average calculated. Otherwise, you may find that the measurement is,
by chance, particularly high or particularly low and thus does not truly
indicate the average over time. For example, if the G-M tube and
counter are set to counting for two hours, and the final count is then
divided by 7200 (seconds), this will give a good approximation to the
average over time as the count time is long compared with the average
count of about 0.5 Bq. Measurements of radioactivity that have had the
background radiation deducted, so that they only represent activity by a
radioactive source under test, are known as corrected counts.
paper lead aluminium
holder for
absorbing material
fig B Investigating nuclear radiations.
WORKED EXAMPLE
In a school experiment, Ricardo measured the background
radiation using a G-M tube and counter for half an hour. The final
reading was 747 counts. What is the average background radiation?
time = 30 x 60 = 1800 S
activity = 1900 = 0.415 Bq
The background count will skew the results of investigations into
nuclear radiations. Whenever such an investigation is undertaken,
the background radiation must also be measured separately and
then deducted from each count measured in the main part of the
investigation.
Alpha decay
Alpha particles are composed of two protons and two neutrons,
the same as a helium nucleus. This is a relatively large particle with
a significant positive charge (+2e), so it is highly ionising. An alpha
particle moving through air typically causes 10 000 ionisations per
millimetre. As it ionises so much, it quickly loses its kinetic energy
and is easily absorbed. A few centimetres travel in air is enough to
absorb an alpha particle, and they are also blocked by paper or skin.
Example alpha decay equation:
29] Am233Np + a
747
neptunium-237 nucleus
Types of nuclear radiation
Many nuclei are slightly unstable and there is a slight probability
that, each second, they may decay. This means that a nucleon
may change from one type to another, or the composition or
energy state of the nucleus as a whole may change. When a
nuclear decay occurs, the radiation particle emitted will leave
the nucleus carrying a certain amount of kinetic energy. As the
particle travels, it will ionise particles in its path, losing a small
amount of that kinetic energy at each ionisation. When all the
kinetic energy is transferred, the radiation particle stops and is
absorbed by the substance it is in at that moment.
alpha
particle
fig C Alpha particle emission.
145
Fission and fusion
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define the concepts of nuclear binding energy and binding energy per nucleon
make calculations of nuclear mass, mass deficit and binding energy, including use of the atomic
mass unit
describe the processes of nuclear fission and nuclear fusion, including the conditions needed to
maintain nuclear fusion
Energy-mass equivalence
We have previously seen that a nucleon has a mass which is approximately equal to 1 unified atomic
mass unit, u (= 1.67 x 10-27 kg). The exact masses of a proton, a neutron and an electron are given
in table A.
Particle
proton
neutron
Mass/atomic mass units/u
1.007 276
1.008 665
0.00054858
Mass/SI units/kg
1.672 623 x 10-27
1.674929 x 10-27
9.109 390 x 10-31
electron
table A Masses of sub-atomic particles.
We might expect that if we know the constituent parts of any nucleus, we can calculate its mass by
finding the total mass of its nucleons. However, in practice we find that the actual, measured mass of
a nucleus is always less than the total mass of its constituent nucleons. This difference is called the
mass deficit, or sometimes the mass defect.
WORKED EXAMPLE
00000
total mass of 6 neutrons
= 6 x 1.008665
= 6.05199u
OOOOOO
measured mass of C-12 atom = 12.000000 u
mass of C-12 nucleus is atomic mass minus
electron mass
= 12.000 000 - (6 X 0.000548 58)
= 11.996 709 u
total mass of 6 protons
= 6 x 1.007 276
= 6.043 656 u
total mass of nucleons in C-12 nucleus
= 6.05199 + 6.043656
= 12.095646u
mass deficit for carbon-12:
Am = 12.095 646 – 11.996 709 = 0.098937u
Am = 0.098937 X 1.66 X 10-27 = 1.642354 x 10-24 kg
fig A How to calculate the mass deficit for carbon-12.
151
