Particle accelerators and detectors
8.2
In Section 7.3.3 we saw how the mass spectrometer deflects an ion using a magnetic field. The ion
can then be identified by the amount of deflection, since this is dependent on the mass and charge
of the ion, and the strength and direction of the magnetic field used.
fig B A hydrogen bubble chamber.
Particle physics experiments took a major leap forward with the invention of the bubble chamber
detector (fig B). As Professor Siegbahn of the Swedish Academy of Sciences commented when
presenting the 1960 Nobel Prize in Physics:
Dr. Glaser, your invention of the 'bubble chamber' has opened up a new world for nuclear science. We can
now observe with our own eyes all the strange processes which occur when high-energy beams from (particle
accelerators) are directed into your chamber."
Professor Siegbahn went on to explain that the bubble chamber acts like a combination of jet-plane
vapour trails and the bubbles that suddenly appear when you open a bottle of fizzy drink. Superheated
liquid hydrogen bubbles into gas form at any point where ions are generated within it. These bubbles
can be observed within the liquid and thus the trails show the paths of moving particles.
fig C An image of particle tracks detected by a hydrogen bubble chamber.
The particle tracks in fig C show how particles can be tracked as they progress through a bubble
chamber, and those affected by the magnetic field across it follow curved paths. As in the mass
spectrometer, the radius of curvature of the tracks will tell us the mass and charge of the particles. In
addition, the picture allows us to analyse interactions as they happened, as the tracks sometimes end
abruptly or have sharp changes in direction when they collide. In some cases, particle tracks appear
to start from nothing. These show instances where particles have been created from uncharged
particles that do not show up.
8.
22
Questions
WORKED EXAMPLE
Look at track A in fig D. If the magnetic field in the bubble chamber
went at right angles to this picture and into the page, would the
particle shown by track A be an electron or a positron (positively
charged anti-electron)?
Explain why ionisation is important in the operation of the Geiger-
Müller tube.
track
x
In fig E, the red and yellow tracks show the creation of an electron
and positron. Identify which track is the electron. The magnetic field
goes into the page.
Current
fig E The creation of an electron-positron pair.
Fig F was taken by Carl Anderson and published in Physical Review
in March 1933 as evidence for a positively charged particle with the
mass of an electron. He had discovered the positron.
fig D Fleming's left hand rule acting on the particle of track A.
Using Fleming's left hand rule, with the index finger pointing
into the page (magnetic field), the centripetal force shown by
the thumb leaves the middle finger, indicating a current flowing,
along the spiral inwards from the larger outside loops. The particle
would be slowing down as it loses kinetic energy by ionising other
particles in its path. The radius of curvature for these tracks is
proportional to the velocity of the particle so deceleration
would cause the particle to spiral inwards. This means the particle
must be travelling in the same direction along the track to the flow
of conventional current, as defined in Fleming's left hand rule, so
the particle must be positive - a positron.
fig F Anderson's positron track is the thin curving grey line.
The dark grey bar across the middle of the picture is a lead absorber
that removes about two thirds of the particle's energy. Explain how
you can tell that the particle is moving upwards in the picture.
Kev definition
A bubble chamber is a particle detection system in which the
particles trigger bubbles to be created in a superheated liquid,
typically hydrogen.
100
THINKING
BIGGER
WP
MEDICAL PARTICLE
ACCELERATORS
Particle accelerators can be used in a variety of medical applications. One of the most exciting
possibilities is in cancer treatment, where a tumour is bombarded with high-energy particles, which
can deliver energy to kill the cancerous cells in a very small volume, so damage to surrounding tissue
is less than with comparative treatments.
CERN INTENSIFIES MEDICAL PHYSICS RESEARCH
CERN has transferred a great deal of technology into the field of
medical physics over the years, from adaptation of its high-energy
particle detectors for PET scanning to the design and development
of dedicated accelerators for particle therapy. Now, CERN is
consolidating all of its diverse activities in the medical physics
arena, with the creation of a new office for medical applications,
to be headed up by Steve Myers.
The LEIR conversion
ejection
rection towards PS
Experiments
ecoon from LINAC3
vtraction line
- New Em
- 27m2
CERN has now confirmed that LEIR can be converted into a
dedicated facility for biomedical research. This "BioLEIR' facility
will provide particle beams of different types at various energies
for use by external researchers. Conveniently, there's also a
54 x 27m hall next to LEIR, currently used for storage, which
could be developed into laboratory space.
Myers explained the rationale for developing such a facility. He
pointed out that although protons and carbon ions are already in
extensive clinical use for treating tumours, and other species such
as oxygen and helium ions are under investigation, there's still a
lack of controlled experiments that directly compare the effect of
different ions on cancer cells under identical conditions.
And while existing clinical centres may well intend to perform
such studies, once patient treatments begin, free accelerator time
for research becomes extremely limited. The big advantage here
is that we don't treat patients', said Myers. 'Our aim is to provide
a service, so researchers don't have to do experiments at a clinical
site, they can come here instead.'
As well as radiobiology experiments, LEIR is lined up for use
in detector development, dosimetry studies and basic physics
investigations such as ion beam fragmentation. The facility would
work in the same way as particle physics experiments are carried
out at CERN: researchers propose experiments, which are peer
reviewed by a panel of experts who select suitable projects, and
CERN controls the beam time allocation.
Before this can happen, however, LEIR needs some hardware
modifications. These include a dedicated front-end that can
accelerate many types of ion species, as well as a new extraction
system and beamlines.
• Extract from an online article by Tami Freeman, editor of medicalphysicsweb posted
on 24 February 2014 at http://medicalphysicsweb.org/cws/article/opinion/56295.
O IOP Publishing. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved.
-
27m -
-54m
fig A Redesign of the Low Energy lon Ring at CERN for medical use.
One of the first projects that Myers will oversee is the
transformation of CERN's Low Energy Ion Ring (LEIR) into a
biomedical facility. LEIR is a small accelerator currently used
to pre-accelerate lead ions for injection into the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC). But it only does this for several weeks each
year, leaving a lot of spare beam time. Importantly, the ring also
has an energy range that matches that of medical accelerators
(440 MeV/u for carbon ions).
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1 6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
104
8.2
Particle detectors
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. describe the roles of electric and magnetic fields in particle detectors
• apply conservation of charge, energy and momentum to interactions between particles and
interpret particle tracks
Principles of detection
Both school laboratory electron diffraction and Geiger and Marsden's alpha scattering experiment
rely on observing light given off from a fluorescent screen when it is hit by a particle. In order to
obtain accurate enough data to reinvent the structure of the atom, Geiger and Marsden spent two
years sitting in a darkened room, for eight hours at a time, counting the flashes of light they saw
through a microscope. Geiger found this so frustrating that he jointly invented the Geiger-Müller
(GM) tube to detect particles, which could then be counted electrically.
cathode
ionising
radiation
mica
window
anode
electron
argon
atom Oion
O
counter
8888
500V
fig A The internal workings of a Geiger-Müller detector.
The GM tube works on the fundamental principle that is common to most particle detectors:
ionisation. As the particle to be detected passes through the tube, it ionises atoms of a gas (typically
argon) which fills the tube. The ions and electrons produced are accelerated by an electric field
between electrodes in the tube and then discharged when they reach the electrodes. This produces
a pulse of electricity, which is counted by a counter connected to the tube. Many different types of
detector have been invented by particle physicists, but the majority detect ionisation caused by the
particles to be detected.
Analysing detections
Particle-counting detectors have their uses, but they cannot commonly distinguish between different
types of particles, a characteristic that is becoming increasingly important in detectors. Modern
particle physics experiments are carried out using such high energies that they can produce hundreds
of different types of particles. Unless the detectors used in these experiments can identify properties
of the particles, such as their energy, charge or mass, then the experimental results will be useless.
98
Particle accelerators and detectors
8.2
Bg
:
Zim
Thus the frequency needed is independent of the radius, meaning
that a constant frequency can be used and the particle will complete
each semicircle through a dee in the same time. That is, until the
speed becomes so fast that mass changes through relativistic effects!
In 2006, an accelerator facility in Dubna, Russia, working jointly
with an American group from the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, claimed to have fused calcium-48 and californium-249
to produce the as yet unnamed element 118 with a mass number
of 294.
The synchrotron
Once the relativistic effects of mass increase are included in the
equation for cyclotron frequency, it becomes:
Bqv2
The team used a particle accelerator to bombard Cf-249 with high
energy ions of Ca-48. With the previous problems surrounding
this heavy element 118, the research team were very careful
about the accuracy of their data, but it may be some time before
the results are reproduced by an independent corroborating
experiment - californium is rare and highly radioactive. Mark
Stoyer, a nuclear chemist at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, who was part of the research team, said:
'We saw something interesting, and the way we've interpreted it, it's
element 118. But you need someone else to duplicate it. A fundamental
tenet of science is reproducibility.'
12am, *,1-ben
Questions
Why do the electrodes in a linear accelerator get progressively
longer?
Note that m, is the particle's rest mass. As the frequency of the
applied accelerating potential difference now depends on the
velocity of the particles, this means that to use a cyclotron to
generate high energy particle beams, it needs very clever circuitry
to produce accurately timed polarity switches. The necessary
electronics were first developed in 1945 and the 'synchrocyclotron
can accelerate particles to as much as 700 MeV.
With the development of varying frequency for the accelerating
p.d., the next logical step was to vary the strength of the magnetic
field using an electromagnet. This means that the radius of the
particle beam's path could be kept constant by simply increasing
the magnetic field strength in line with the increasing momentum.
A single ring accelerator like this is called a synchrotron.
Alternate accelerating tubes and bending magnets can generate
very high energy particle beams. For example, the Tevatron at
Fermilab near Chicago, in the USA, could give particles 1 TeV of
energy (Tera = 1012). Alternatively, these rings can be used to store
charged particles by making them circulate endlessly at a constant
energy. This is a particularly important use when trying to store
anti-matter, which will annihilate if it comes into contact with
normal matter (see Section 8.3.1).
2
Lawrence's second cyclotron, built with the assistance of Stanley
Livingston, was 25 cm in diameter and accelerated protons to
1 MeV.
(a) Calculate the speed of these protons.
(b) Calculate the momentum of these protons.
(c) Calculate the magnetic field strength Lawrence used in this
cyclotron, assuming the protons move in a circle around the
very edge of the machine.
(d) Calculate the frequency of the voltage that Lawrence and
Livingston had to apply to achieve this proton acceleration.
3
Ninovium - scientists sometimes cheat too
In 1999, the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in California
WP) published a paper claiming that they had produced an
isotope of an element with atomic number 118. The paper
claimed they had succeeded in observing a chain of alpha decays
following their collision of 449 MeV krypton-86 ions into a target
of lead-208. The radioactive decay sequence was indicative of
having started from element 118 - initially named 'ninovium' after
the Bulgarian team leader Victor Ninov. No other lab in the world
was able to reproduce the results, and after a two year inquiry, it
was determined that Ninov had falsified the results. The Berkeley
Lab retracted the paper, and Victor Ninov, who has continually
maintained his innocence, was fired.
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is a giant circular accelerator near
Geneva in Switzerland. The LHC website has some facts about it:
• the circular ring has a circumference of 27 km
• each proton goes around over 11 000 times a second
• each proton has 7 x 1012 eV of kinetic energy
(a) Calculate the speed of these protons.
(b) Calculate mv2 for these protons using m, = 1.67 x 10-27 kg.
(c) How does your answer to (b) compare with the 7 TeV of kinetic
energy the protons are given through p.d. acceleration?
(d) Explain this difference.
neutron
Kev definitions
A linear accelerator is a machine which accelerates charged
particles along a straight line.
A cyclotron is a circular machine that accelerates charged particles,
usually following a spiral path.
A synchrotron is a machine that accelerates charged particles
around a fixed circular path.
Kr-86
Pb-208
fusion
compound
nucleus
element
118
fig F The fusion reaction which was claimed to produce element 118.
Particle accelerators and detectors
8.2
Questions
1 What can the curvature of a particle's track tell us about its charge
and mass?
2 How could momentum conservation help us to 'infer the presence
of undetectable neutral particles such as neutrinos?
3 Why do we need four separate detector machines to
undertake the various different particle searches at
the LHC?
4 Do you think the cost of the LHC is justified?
Explain your reasons for this answer.
What must a detector be capable of doing?
In developing the LHC experiments, the scientists had to work out
what they needed the detectors to be able to do. The following
nine points are listed on the ATLAS website as their aims.
1 Measure the directions, momenta and signs of charged
particles.
2 Measure the energy carried by electrons and photons in each
direction from the collision.
3 Measure the energy carried by hadrons (protons, pions,
neutrons, etc.) in each direction.
4 Identify which charged particles from the collision, if any,
are electrons.
5 Identify which charged particles from the collision, if any,
are muons.
6 Identify whether some of the charged particles originate at
points a few millimetres from the collision point rather than
at the collision point itself (signaling a particle's decay a few
millimetres from the collision point).
7 Infer (through momentum conservation) the presence of
undetectable neutral particles such as neutrinos.
8 Have the capability to process the above information fast
enough to permit flagging about 10–100 potentially interesting
events per second out of the billion collisions per second that
occur, and recording the measured information.
9 The detector must also be capable of long and reliable
operation in a very hostile radiation environment.
Data analysis
It has been estimated that, when running, the amount of data
resulting from the LHC experiments is approximately 10% of
that produced through all human activities across the world. To
analyse the raw data from the incredibly complex detectors, a
system of computer analysis called the Grid was developed. This
enables thousands of computers across the world to be linked
together via the internet in order that their combined computing
power can be used to study the experimental results and search
out any which indicate the new discoveries it is hoped the LHC
will produce. Of every 10 billion collision results, only about
10–100 are interesting' reactions. The ones that show things we
already know need to be quickly filtered out of the data so that
computing power is not wasted.
103
Particle accelerators and detectors
8.2
Was Einstein right?
One of Einstein's claims in his theory of special relativity is that nothing can accelerate beyond the
speed of light. This means that particles in accelerators must be faced with a problemn when they are
already travelling close to the speed of light and then pass through a p.d. which should accelerate
them beyond it. In 1964, William Bertozzi demonstrated that at very high speeds, particles deviate
from the equation mv = 9V and do indeed never accelerate beyond the speed of light.
By measuring the actual speed of electrons accelerated from a Van de Graaff generator and then
determining their actual kinetic energy by colliding them with a target and measuring the heat
generated, Bertozzi was able to show that the energy imparted by the accelerating p.d. started to
become more than the amount expected from mva.
This demonstration showed that whilst the kinetic energy and momentum of particles can continue
to increase without limit, their speed does not. This can only happen if the mass of a particle
seemingly increases with its speed. This apparent mass increase becomes significant at speeds
approaching light speed - known as 'relativistic speeds'.
oscilloscope
short tube signalling start of
electron burst down the flight path
3 X 10-9 sec
light
flasher
charging
belt
electron burst charge
distribution as a function
of time
cable
transiitting
Sweep
signal
aluminium disc to stop
electrons and signal
arrival of electron burst
at end of flight path
cables
transmitting
signal of equal
transit times
window
------
phototube -
15 MeV LINAC
Van de Graaff
pressure tank
fast'
pulser
1st section
of LINAC
electron
gum
equipotential
planes
1 metre -
8.4 metre
drift space
8.4 metre -
fig B Bertozzi's experiment to demonstrate that nothing can accelerate beyond the speed of light.
1.54
EdMen
u
House Potes
J
P
(met e
(m.c'+ E)?
0.5
10-
1.0
1.5
4.5
1.
5
NO
0.867
0.910
0.960
0.987
1.0
0.752
0.828
0.922
0.974
1.0
9
30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
fig C The solid curve represents the prediction for a) according to Newtonian mechanics, = The dashed
27 m.c?
curve represents the prediction of Special Rela
v.mis the rest mass of an electron and
(m.c? + EN
C is the speed of light in a vacuum, 3 x 108m 5-1. The solid circles are the data of Bertozzi's experiment. The table
presents the observed values of ().
95
8.2
3
The Large Hadron Collider m
0.999999c
by here
CMS
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• discuss the role of the Large Hadron Collider in particle
physics research
explain why high energies are required to investigate the
structure of the nucleus
www.
LHC
CERN's big synchrotron
NNNNNNNNNN
NNN
SPS
N N
ALICE
LHC-b
ATLAS
-
H
-
+
0.87c
by here
-
-
-
-
0.3c
by here
-
-
p Pb ions
fig B An overview of the Large Hadron Collider.
fig A Inside the Large Hadron Collider.
At the Organisation Européenne pour la Recherche Nucléaire
(known by its older acronym CERN), or European Organisation
for Nuclear Research, they have constructed the biggest machine
in the history of planet Earth. This is the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) - a gigantic synchrotron over 8 km in diameter, built
100 metres underground on the border between Switzerland and
France. At a total building cost of just under 4 billion Euros, with
staff from 111 nations involved in its building and operation, it
is the largest experiment ever undertaken. When running, its
temperature is 1.9 K, making the LHC the coldest place in the
Solar System (excluding colder man-made experiments).
Four smashing experiments
The machine is designed to collide protons into each other at
energies of 14 TeV (14 x 1012 eV), travelling at 99.9999991% of
the speed of light. These conditions emulate those occurring
in the Universe 1 billionth of a second after the Big Bang. LHC
scientists are hoping that this will then produce particles and
interactions not seen since the Big Bang. In its first three years of
operation, each collision had a total energy of up to 8 TeV, and
CERN's schedule was to reach 14 TeV in mid-2015. Such high
energies can probe the structure of the nucleons themselves.
At such high energies, the beams of protons counter-rotating
around the 27 km ring will cross each other's paths 30 million
times every second, resulting in 600 million collisions per second.
There are four critical experiments in the LHC, each named by
an acronym: CMS, LHCb, ATLAS and ALICE. Each of these
experiments has an incredibly complex detector built in a cavern
around the accelerator, and one of the beam-crossing points is
at the centre of each detector. Each one is aimed at detecting
particular products from the collisions, each is searching in several
different ways for specific undiscovered but theoretical particles.
The detectors include strong magnetic fields and will track the
movements of particles through the space that the detector
occupies. As mass-energy and momentum are always conserved
in particle interactions, along with charge, the records of particle
tracks can be interpreted to identify the particles in the detector
and any reactions that they undergo.
101
8.2
to study the collisions of heavy ions, such as lead, accelerated to
almost the speed of light. These collisions are in the second phase
of LHC operation, and it is hoped they will create a quark-gluon
plasma, which has been predicted by quantum mechanics theory.
The Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS)
One of the two teams that jointly announced discovery of the
Higgs boson in July 2012 was from the CMS experiment
(fig C). If the LHC achieves further exciting discoveries, they may
well come from this detector. There are several hypotheses in
different areas of theoretical physics that may gain confirmation
evidence from the LHC. Some of these sound a little bizarre. For
example, it is hoped that the CMS will observe mini black holes,
dark matter, supersymmetric particles and gravitons.
The CMS is set up with various detecting chambers for different
types of particle, and has 100 million individual detectors
organised in a 3D barrel containing as much iron as the Eiffel
Tower. By monitoring the tracks of particles, their charges and
masses can be determined. The energies and momenta can also
be measured and the fact that they must be conserved, means that
all this information analysed together can identify all the particles
and reactions in each collision.
ATLAS
The ATLAS detector (fig D) is 45 m long and 25 m high. It was
the other experiment to provide experimental data verifying a new
particle that is likely to be the Higgs boson. Among its potential
further discoveries to come are extra dimensions of space,
microscopic black holes, and evidence for dark matter particles
in the Universe. Originally, ATLAS was an acronym for A Toroidal
Lhc Apparatus, but this has now largely been dropped and it is
simply the name of the experiment.
The Large Hadron Collider beauty experiment
(LHCb)
This detector looks out for the decays of both the bottom quark
(sometimes called beauty) and the charm quark by looking for
mesons containing these. This is particularly aimed at working
out why our Universe contains mostly matter and very little
anti-matter, when theoretically the two should appear in equal
amounts.
A Large lon Collider experiment (ALICE)
Although ALICE initially observed the proton-proton collisions
that the LHC started with, this detector is particularly intended
fig D The ATLAS experiment detector in the LHC.
CMS
A Compact Solenoidal Detetor for LHC
MUON GHAMBERS INNER TRACKER
EM CRYSTAL CAL
HADRON CAL
VERY FORWARD
CALORIMETER
SUPERCONDUCTING COIL
Total Weight : 12,000 t
Overall diameter: 14.00 m
Overall length : 20.00 m
Magnetic field : 4 Tesla
RETURN YORE
CMS 1000
fig C Particle detection in the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS).
102
8.2
Accelerating particles in circles
As scientists struggled to produce ever longer linear accelerators.
they sought to coil their accelerators up into a circle so that the
particles could be accelerated in an electric field repeatedly in a
smaller space. To do this, we use the fact that charged particles
moving across a magnetic field will feel a centripetal force, and
so will move in a circular path. We can work out the radius of this
circular path, and use it to construct a circular accelerator of the
right dimensions.
The cyclotron
In 1930, Ernest Lawrence developed the first cyclotron, a circular
accelerator which could give protons about 1 MeV of energy.
In a cyclotron, there are two D-shaped electrodes (or dees),
and the particles are accelerated in the electric field in the gap
between them. Whilst inside the dees, the particle will travel
along a semicircular path under the influence of the magnetic
field, before being accelerated across the gap again; then another
semicircle, another acceleration across the gap, and so on. As
each acceleration increases the momentum of the particle, the
radius of its path within the dee increases, and so it steadily spirals
outwards until it emerges from an exit hole and hits the target
placed in a bombardment chamber in its path.
velocity v
X1 X
south pole of
magnet
voltage supply -
alternating square
wave pd.
X
magnetic field B
into page
glass cylinder
charge
lid of
vacuum
chamber
+ to vacuum pump
velocity v
D-shaped
electrode
vacuum-tight
thin window
filament
support
and leads
X
fig D The circular trajectory of a charged particle moving across a magnetic
field. Note that field lines can be shown coming out of a page by
drawing a dot, and those going into a page (like the magnetic field here)
can be shown by drawing a cross.
bombardment
chamber
(open to air)
north pole of
magnet
fig E The structure of a cyclotron.
We have previously seen the equation for the force on a charged
particle moving across a magnetic field (Section 7.3.3):
F = Bqv
This force acts at right angles to the velocity, v, meaning that the
particle will follow a circular path. Recall that the equation for the
centripetal force on anything moving in a circle (Section 6.2.2) is:
Cyclotron frequency
In order to maintain the accelerations at exactly the correct
moment, the p.d. needs to switch direction exactly when the
particle exits from one dee to move across the gap between them.
This means the voltage supply has to follow a square wave pattern
where it flips polarity instantaneously
The frequency of these polarity switches only depends on the
particle being used and the strength of the magnetic field applied:
We can equate these two expressions:
Bqv = mv
Dividing out the velocity from each side, and rearranging to find
an expression for the radius of the circle, gives:
Ba
T=271
or
r= Ba
During one complete period of the alternating voltage the particle
will pass through both dees, thus completing a full circle at that
radius.
However:
mv
Bq
This means that for a given magnetic field, the radius of the path
of a charged particle is proportional to its momentum. At slow
speeds, the radius is proportional to velocity (or the square root
of the kinetic energy), but as these experiments generally send
particles at speeds approaching the speed of light, relativistic
effects need to be accounted for. In particular, at these very high
speeds the particle's mass appears increase, which would also
alter its momentum. The overall result is that a particle increasing
in speed would travel along an outwardly spiralling path.
96
T= 2MV
Bqv
21m
BA
TOPIC 8
Nuclear and particle physics
Particle accelerators and
detectors
CHAPTER
8.2
Introduction
LALT
It is remarkable to think that scientists have managed to determine the nature of particles that are only one femtometre
across - the size of an atomic nucleus. To give you a clearer idea of just how small that is, imagine placing 1000 solar
systems side by side. How small you are in comparison to the thousand solar systems is similar in scale to how small a
proton is compared with you.
Developing both the theories and the technology to manipulate subatomic particles so that we can undertake experiments on
them is one of the great triumphs of modern science. It might seem contradictory, but the Large Hadron Collider, which is our
greatest success story in such tiny-scale experiments, is actually the largest machine ever built!
In this chapter, we will look at how we can arrange for various tiny particles to move in such a way that we can make them
collide with each other, to cause them to react and produce other exotic particles. In order to discover what particles these
collisions generate, we will also learn how they can be detected and then identified.
All the maths you need
• Recognising and use of appropriate units (e.g. the electronvolt)
• Making order of magnitude calculations (e.g. comparing cyclotron energies)
• Estimating results (e.g. comparing particle speeds in different accelerators)
• Changing the subject of non-linear equations (e.g. calculating relativistic synchroton frequency)
• Substituting numerical values into equations using appropriate units (e.g. calculating particle path radii)
92
8.2
Exam-style questions
4 A strong magnetic field of flux density B can be used to trap a
positive ion by making it follow a circular orbit, as shown.
1 An electron moving at 2.05 X 10 km s-1 is made to move in a
circular path by a 0.98 T magnetic field applied perpendicular
to its velocity. The radius of the circle the electron travels in is:
A 1.19 x 10-7m
B 0.119 mm
C 8400 m
D 1.31 x 1028 m.
[Total: 1]
[1]
2 The diagram shows the track of a charged particle travelling
in a bubble chamber detector, in which the magnetic field goes
into the page.
(a) Explain how the magnetic field maintains the ion in a
circular orbit. You may add to a copy of the diagram above
if you wish.
[2]
(b) Show that the mass m of the ion will be given by
Ba
m =
2af
where q is the charge on the ion and fis the number of
revolutions per second.
(c) The above arrangement will not prevent a positive ion from
moving vertically. To do this, a weak electric field is applied
using the arrangement shown below.
[3]
X X X XX X X
The particle:
A is negative and moves from A to B
B is positive and moves from A to B
C is negative and moves from B to A
D is positive and moves from B to A.
[1]
[Total: 1]
[2]
3 In order to investigate the structure of the nucleus, high
energies are needed. One reason for this is that:
A The radius of circular motion of a particle in a cyclotron is
proportional to the kinetic energy.
B The nucleus can only be ionised by high energy particles.
C The nucleus will absorb low energy particles.
D The de Broglie wavelength is inversely proportional to a
particle's velocity.
[1]
[Total: 1]
(1) Explain how the electric field prevents the ion moving
vertically
(ii) This device is known as a Penning Trap. It can be used
to determine the mass of an ion to an accuracy of
3 parts in 10 million.
Show that the mass of a sulfur ion can be measured to
the nearest 0.00001 u.
mass of sulfur ion = 32.0645 u
(iii) Under certain conditions, nuclei of sulfur emit a
gamma ray with a known energy of 2.2 MeV.
Calculate the resulting loss in mass of a sulfur ion in u
and show that this value could be determined by the
Penning Trap technique.
[4]
[Total: 13]
[2]
106
Thinking Bigger
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this report.
1. The article is from medicalphysicsweb, which is a community website hosted by the
Institute of Physics through their publishing division. Explain why the Institute of Physics
would spend time and money developing a website that is about medical matters.
2. Describe what level of fundamental research is in this article, and how that affects the
style of the writing here.
3. a. Describe the level of language used in the article, in particular the scientific
terminology used.
b. Who do you think the intended audience is for this website, and how does that
match with your answer to part a?
Consider that the Institute
of Physics website's About
Us section states: 'The
Institute of Physics is a
leading scientific society.
We are a charitable
organisation with a
worldwide membership
of more than 50000,
working together to
advance physics education,
research and application."
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
Consider the equation for
calculating kinetic energy.
4. a. Explain how the various ions mentioned would be accelerated in the LEIR.
b. What would be the difference in the motion of helium 2+ ions compared with
oxygen 2+ ions, if each was accelerated through the same voltage in the LEIR?
5. a. Explain why the LEIR was designed as a ring.
b. How can accelerating ions be made to continually travel around a ring of constant
radius?
6. One of the most exciting aspects of this kind of cancer treatment is that, unlike X-ray or
gamma ray treatment, the delivery of energy increases as the ion reaches the target
tumour. As the particle slows down, it can interact with many more nearby particles,
losing energy more quickly.
Explain how this could be better for the patient than the more uniform delivery of
energy along the entire path in X-ray treatment.
VV0000
Activity
Imagine there is going to be a similar website aimed at a younger audience. Rewrite this article to be
published for a readership under 16 years old.
Consider how the level of
science must be reduced,
and thus what factual
aspects you would need to
leave out, whilst retaining
the interesting cancer
treatment angle
8.2
YOU ARE
RE
HERE
8.3
8
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
105
Exam-style questions
8.2
5 (a) A cyclotron can be used to accelerate charged particles.
alternating potential
difference
dee
dee
WT
magnetic field
Explain the purpose of the magnetic field in the cyclotron.
You may add to a copy of the diagramn if you wish. [2]
(b) A beam of low-speed protons are introduced into a
cyclotron.
(i) Show that the number of revolutions per second, f.
completed by the protons is given by
eB
f = 2M
where e is the electronic charge
B is the uniform magnetic flux density within
the cyclotron
mis the mass of the proton.
[3]
(ii) An alternating potential difference is placed across the
two dees to increase the energy of the protons.
Explain why the potential difference that is used is
alternating
121
(iii) Initially, whilst the proton speeds are low, the frequency
at which the potential difference has to alternate is
constant.
Explain how the frequency must change as the protons
gain more and more energy
[2]
(c) In the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, protons follow a
circular path with speeds close to the speed of light. X-rays
can be produced by free protons which are accelerating.
Explain why this provides a source of X-rays, even though
the speeds of the protons are constant,
[Total: 111
[2]
6 Explain the structure of linear particle accelerators and
cyclotron accelerators, including the role of electric and
magnetic fields in each.
[Total: 6]
[6]
107
.
1
What have I studied before?
• Voltage as a measure of the energy transferred by
charges
Circular motion and centripetal force
The conservation of momentum, charge and
energy
The effects of electric fields on the movement of
charged particles
The effects of magnetic fields on the movement of
charged particles
Coulomb's law for electrostatic forces
What will I study later?
• The various fundamental particles that have been
discovered
Interactions between fundamental particles
• The four fundamental forces of nature
• Nuclear fission and nuclear fusion
• The importance of particles in stars and between
stars
What will I study in this chapter?
The structure and functioning of linear particle
accelerators
The structure and functioning of circular particle
accelerators
The detection and identification of subatomic
particles
How to interpret particle tracks in particle
detectors
Deeper matter probing experiments, including the
Large Hadron Collider
8.2
1
Particle accelerators
electrons to an energy of 50 GeV, meaning that they have
effectively passed through a potential difference of 50 billion volts.
GeV' means gigaelectronvolts, or "X10" eV'.
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
describe the roles of electric and magnetic fields in particle
accelerators
• derive and use the equation rate for a charged particle in a
magnetic field
• explain why high energies are required to investigate the
structure of the nucleus
Did you know?
LINAC facts
Despite being over 50 years old, the Stanford Linear Accelerator in
California remains the world's longest linear accelerator, or LINAC.
However, plans for the International Linear Collider are far
advanced. Most likely to be built in Japan, this would consist of two
linear colliders, each over 15 km long, designed to collide electrons
and positrons, initially with energies of 250 GeV, but with the design
possibility of raising this to 1 TeV.
Particle accelerators
To investigate the internal substructure of particles like nucleons –
protons and neutrons – scientists collide them with other particles
at very high speeds (very high energies). It is necessary to use
high energy particles because at lower energies the particles just
bounce off each other, keeping their internal structure secret. If
we can collide particles together hard enough, they will break up,
revealing their structure. In most cases, additional particles are
created from the energy of the collision. Sometimes these extra
particles reveal or confirm other new physics.
The challenge for scientists has been to accelerate particles to
high enough speeds. Charged particles can be accelerated in
straight lines using electric fields, and their direction changed
along a curved path by a magnetic field.
If the particles to be accelerated by the linear accelerator in
fig A are electrons, they are generated by an electrostatic machine
(like a Van de Graaff generator) and then introduced into the
machine. Once inside the cylinder, the electrons move in a straight
line, as the electrode is equally attracting in all directions. The
alternating voltage supply is made to change as the electrons
reach the middle of tube A, so it becomes negative. This repels the
electrons out of the end of tube A and on towards tube B, which now
has a positive potential. They accelerate towards it, and the whole
process repeats as they pass through tube B and are then accelerated
on towards tube C. This carries on until the electrons reach the end
of the line, at which point they emerge to collide with a target.
In order to keep accelerating particles that are moving faster and
faster, the acceleration tubes must be made longer and longer as
the particles travel through each successive one at a higher speed,
whilst the time between potential difference flips is fixed as the
alternating voltage has a uniform frequency of a few gigahertz (often
referred to as radio frequency, RF). The limit on the use of this kind
of accelerator is how long you can afford to build it, remembering
that the whole thing must be in a vacuum so that the particles do not
collide with air atoms, and it must be perfectly straight
Linear accelerators
One of the simplest ways to produce energy high enough for
these particle collisions is to accelerate a beam of charged
particles along a straight path. However, this is limited by the
maximum achievable potential difference. In order to overcome
this problem, the particles are accelerated in stages (fig A).
They are repeatedly accelerated through the maximum p.d.,
making the particle energies very high. Using this principle, the
3.2 km Stanford Linear Accelerator in the USA can accelerate
high frequency (3000 MHz) AC voltage
electrons
injected
B
particle beam
fig A The structure of a linear accelerator.
94
