Probing matter
8.1
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the wavelength of an electron in a beam which has been
accelerated through 2000V?
Ex = eV = -1.6 x 10-19 x -2000 = 3.2 x 10-16)
Ex = 3 mv2 = 3.2 x 10-16)
2E 2x 3.2 x 10-16 -2.65 x 107m5-1
.. V=1 m 19.11 x 10-31
6.63 x 10-34
9.11 x 10-31 x 2.65 x 107
X = 2.75 x 10-11 m
Electron diffraction and alpha particle scattering both highlight
the idea that we can study the structure of matter by probing it
with beams of high energy particles. The more detail - or smaller
scale - the structure to be investigated has, the higher energy the
beam of particles needs to be. This means that very high energies
are needed to investigate the structure of nucleons, as they are so
incredibly small. Accelerating larger and larger particles to higher
and higher energies has been the aim of particle physicists since
Thomson discovered the electron in 1897.
Questions
Investigation
WP
Investigating electron diffraction
You may have the equipment to observe electron diffraction. By
measuring the radius of the circular pattern for a certain accelerating
voltage, you can perform a calculation to confirm de Broglie's
hypothesis.
| Calculate the de Broglie wavelengths for the following:
(a) an electron travelling at 2% of the speed of light
(b) an electron which has been accelerated through 1200V
(c) a proton with a momentum of 5 x 10-21 kg ms?
(d) you running at 5 ms!
2 Why would de Broglie not have been awarded the Nobel
Prize before the Davisson-Germer experiment?
WP
Calculate the speed at which an electron would have to travel if
it were to be used to probe the structure of the nucleus. (It would
need a de Broglie wavelength of about the size of the nucleus:
X = 5 x 10-15 m.) Comment on your answer.
4
Carry out some research to find out how the direction of the
electron beam in a cathode ray oscilloscope (CRO) can be changed
in order to make any point on the screen light up. Show this in a
diagram. Explain how such a CRO could be set up in a hospital to
display the electrical impulses of a patient's heart.
fig B Measuring electron diffraction occurring through a sliver of carbon.
The idea of electrons acting as waves has allowed scientists to study
the structure of crystals, along similar lines to X-ray crystallography.
When waves pass through a gap which is about the same size as
their wavelength, they are diffracted - they spread out. The degree
of diffraction spreading depends on the ratio of the size of the gap
to the wavelength of the wave. If a beam of electrons is aimed at a
crystal, the gaps between atoms in the crystal can act as a diffraction
grating and the electron waves produce a diffraction pattern on a
screen. Measuring the pattern allows the spacings between the atoms
to be calculated
Key definitions
The photoelectric effect is the phenomenon in which electrons are
released from a metal surface as a result of its exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
Thermionic emission is the phenomenon in which electrons are
released from a metal surface as a result of its exposure to thermal
energy.
A cathode ray is a beam of electrons.
THINKING
BIGGER
BREMSSTRAHLUNG Cm
When charged particles accelerate they emit electromagnetic radiation. This is called
bremsstrahlung, although other terms, like cyclotron radiation, are often used in specific
circumstances such as acceleration caused by movement in a circle.
WHY DO ACCELERATED ELECTRONS RADIATE
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION?
When an electron is stationary it has an electric field around it. The
strength of that electric field (called the electrostatic field) is given
by the equation
In 1907 J.J. Thomson, who discovered the electron in 1897,
presented an argument which helps us understand why an
accelerated electron produces EM radiation.
Er 4180 m2
E, =
(Eq.1)
w
w
w
where E, is the radial component of the electric field (which, in
this case, is the only component), e is the charge on the electron,
is the radial distance from the electron, and s is the permittivity of
free space (8.854 x 10-12 F/m or Cº/N/m²).
w
www w
SANNA
-
fig B The electric field around an electron is considered at two times, 0 (black)
and t (red), between which it accelerates.
fig A An electron is surrounded by a radial electric field.
In fig B, the electron is accelerated to the right along the x-axis.
The black dot represents its position at time t = 0, the red dot its
position at time t = 1. The black dashed circle is large enough so
that its radius r>ct, where c is the speed of light. Therefore the
field lines outside of this black dashed circle are unaffected by the
movement of the electron. The red solid lines represent the new
field lines due to the electron's new position, with the red solid
circle being centred on the electron's new position.
For the field lines to remain continuous, they must be bent at the
later time, as shown by the kinks in the red lines. This bending of
the field lines leads to the generation of a pulse of EM radiation.
If the electron is moving in a wire we have a current. A moving
electron produces a magnetic field, but this magnetic field is
constant because the electron's motion has a constant velocity. In
order for an electron to radiate electromagnetic (EM) radiation,
it needs to accelerate. Remember, acceleration means its velocity
needs to change, which can be achieved either by changing the
electron's speed or its direction. Both types of change will produce
an acceleration, and hence produce EM radiation.
•
Article by Rhodri Evans on his blog *The Curious Astronomer' dated 13 May
2014, http://thecuriousastronomer.wordpress.com/2014/05/13/why-do-
accelerated-electrons-radiate-electromagnetic-radiation/
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book
1 6 .1
YOU A
6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
HER
88
8.1
2
Electrons from atoms
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain that electrons are released in thermionic emission
describe how electrons can be accelerated by electric and
magnetic fields
explain why high energies are required to investigate the
structure of nucleons
These are the principles by which cathode ray oscilloscopes
(CROs) and old-style televisions operate. The electron beam in
a CRO is moved left and right, and up and down, by passing the
beam through horizontal and vertical electric fields. These are
generated by electric plates so the strength and direction can be
altered. Thus the point on the screen which is emitting light can be
changed quickly and easily.
Electron beams
Free conduction electrons in metals need a certain amount
of energy if they are to escape from the surface of the metal
structure. This energy can be supplied by a beam of photons, as
seen in the photoelectric effect. The electrons can also gain
enough energy simply through heating of the metal. The release
of electrons from the surface of a metal as it is heated is known as
thermionic emission.
An electron probe
Electron beams fired at a crystal will produce scattering patterns
that can tell us about the structure of the crystal (fig A). Unlike
the patterns found by Geiger and Marsden in Rutherford's alpha
particle scattering experiments, it was shown in 1927 by Davisson
and Germer that an electron beam can produce a diffraction
pattern. This provided the experimental evidence to prove a
novel theory that had been suggested just three years earlier by
the French physicist, Louis de Broglie. He was bemused that light
could be shown to behave as a wave in some situations and as a
particle in other circumstances. He hypothesised that this might
also be the case for things which were traditionally considered to
be particles. By taking an analogous mathematical route to that
of finding the momenturn of a photon, de Broglie had proposed
that the wavelength, 1, of a particle could be calculated from its
momentumn (p) using the expression:
Learning tip
Students often confuse thermionic emission and the photoelectric
effect. Whilst the two phenomena have similarities, they are distinct
and you must use the correct term with the correct scenario.
where h is the Planck constant. So:
1 = MV
If, on escaping, these electrons find themselves in an electric
field, they will be accelerated by the field, moving in the positive
direction. The kinetic energy they gain will depend on the p.d., V,
that they move through, according to the equation:
E = eV
where e is the charge on an electron.
WORKED EXAMPLE
How fast would an electron be moving if it was accelerated from
rest through a p.d. of 2500 V?
Ex = eV = -1.6 x 10-19 x -2500 = 4 x 10-16)
Ex = 1 mv2
2E 2x 4 x 10-16
v=1m 19.11 * 10-31
V= 2.96 x 107ms-1
The Davisson-Germer experiment proved that the diffraction
pattern obtained when a cathode ray hit a crystal could only
be produced if the electrons in the beam had a wavelength that
coincided with the de Broglie wavelength. As a consequence of
this experimental confirmation, Louis de Broglie was awarded the
1929 Nobel Prize for Physics.
O
.O.
O
Using thermionic emission to produce electrons, and applying
an electric field to accelerate them, we can generate a beam of
fast-moving electrons, traditionally known as a cathode ray.
This beam of electrons will be deflected by the force produced
on it if it passes through a further electric field or a magnetic
field. If a fast-moving electron hits a screen painted with a certain
chemical, the screen will fluoresce - it will emit light.
fig A Electron diffraction patterns can explore the molecular structure
of crystals.
86
Exam-style questions
8.1
(11
7 In an experiment to investigate the structure of the atom,
a-particles are fired at a thin metal foil, which causes the
o-particles to scatter.
(a) (i) State the direction in which the number of q-particles
detected will be a maximum.
(ii) State what this suggests about the structure of the
atoms in the metal foil.
[1]
(b) Some o-particles are scattered through 180°
State what this suggests about the structure of the atoms in
the metal foil.
(c) The diagram shows the path of an o-particle passing near
to a single nucleus in the metal foil.
[2]
nucleus
path of
Ci-particle
(i) Name the force that causes the deflection of the
a-particle.
[1]
(ii) On a copy of the diagram, draw an arrow to show the
direction of the force acting on the a-particle at the
point where the force is a maximum. Label the force F
(iii) The foil is replaced by a metal of greater proton
number.
Draw the path of an a-particle that has the same
initial starting point and velocity as the one drawn in
the diagram.
[2]
[Total: 9]
8 With the aid of a diagram, explain the structure of the atom
that was proposed after the results from Rutherford's alpha
particle scattering experiment were published, and the
evidence for this model of the atom.
[Total: 6]
(67
91
Probing matter
8.1
As radiurn must have 88 protons by definition, it is quite common not to write the 88. You might
call this isotope 'radium-226' and this will be enough information to know its proton number and
neutron number.
A quantum mechanical atom
In the 1920s, Werner Heisenberg altered the model of the atom, which had electrons in orbits like
planets in a Solar System. His uncertainty principle holds that we cannot know the exact position and
velocity of anything at a given moment. Instead of specific orbits, his new version of the atom has
regions around the nucleus in which there is a high probability of finding an electron, and the shapes
of these 'probability clouds' represent what we currently refer to as the electron 'orbitals'.
is orbital
>2s orbital
nucleus
2p orbitals
fig E A quantum mechanical model of an atom's structure.
Questions
| Use a periodic table to pick five elements at random. List them using standard symbols and then explain
how many protons and neutrons each one has.
2 Suggest why it has taken so long for scientists to develop the current model of the atom.
3 Give two strengths and two weaknesses of the analogy that an atom is like a mini Solar System.
4
Chadwick suggested that alpha particles colliding with beryllium produced neutrons according to the
equation:
ja +Be = "C + on
What numbers are represented by A and B?
Key definitions
Plum pudding model is a pre-1911 model of the atom, in which the main body of the atom is composed
of a nebulous positively charged material (the pudding 'dough') with electrons (the 'plums) randomly
scattered through it.
Nucleons are any of the protons and neutrons comprising a nucleus.
Isotopes are atoms of the same element with differing numbers of neutrons in the nuclei.
The proton number is the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom.
The atomic number is an alternative name for "proton number'.
The strong nuclear force is the extremely short-range force between hadrons (such as protons and neutrons).
The nucleon number is the total number of all neutrons and protons in a nucleus.
The mass number is an alternative name for the 'nucleon number'.
The neutron number is the total number of neutrons within a given nucleus.
85
Thinking Bigger
8.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this internet blog. The text is part of a
webpage on the personal blog of a Cardiff University astrophysicist.
vy
1. Describe how the level of scientific writing changes during the course of the extract.
2. What is the benefit of including diagrams in an explanation of this sort?
3. What scientific level of audience do you think the webpage is aimed at?
If you look at the webpage
for the complete text,
there is an even more
Striking change in the
scientific level as you read
further through the article.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
4. What aspect of fig A illustrates the r term at the bottom of the first equation?
5. a. A direct current in a wire is not accelerating and so will not cause EM radiation
emission. Explain how current moves in an alternating current, and explain what
implications this must have for bremsstrahlung.
b. Suggest how a mobile phone could generate its radio transmissions.
c. Why would transformers generate electromagnetic interference, such as static on
radio stations?
6. a. Explain how an electron moving at a constant speed in a circle could be said to be
accelerating
b. How could the idea of bremsstrahlung raise problems with the theoretical structure
of an atom as electrons orbiting a nucleus, like planets in the Solar System?
7. The word 'bremsstrahlung' comes from two German words, meaning 'to brake' and
'radiation'. Explain why this term is appropriate.
wwwy
The process of generating
radio transmissions is the
Same in all cases; mobile
phones are just one
example.
Activity
In the next chapter of this book, the functioning of particle accelerators, both straight and circular, is explained,
but bremsstrahlung is not mentioned. Write an additional piece of text that could be included in Section
8.2.1, which explains what causes this radiation, and its implications for the energy input requirements of
particle accelerators. Include how you think linear and circular accelerators may differ in this problem of
wasted energy
000000000
You could include
references to efficiency
in your description but
do not write detailed
comparisons or
calculations.
TRE 8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1) 11.1
12.
1
13.1
Probing matter
8.1
source
gold foil
microscope
Learning tip
When Rutherford published
the results of the alpha particle
scattering experiment in 1911,
he could not tell for certain
whether the charge on the
nucleus was positive or
negative. Within two years, the
English physicist Henry
Moseley had published a law
about X-ray spectra that
implied the nucleus must be
overall positive. Rutherford
confirmed this in a letter to the
scientific journal Nature in
December 1913. Rutherford
also did not use the word
'nucleus' in the 1911 paper but
had taken it on board by 1913.
zinc sulphide
screen
vacuum
fig B Rutherford's alpha particle scattering apparatus.
small deflection
alpha particle
gold nucleus
alpha particle
deflected
more than 90°
more deflection
fig C Alpha particle paths in scattering from gold atoms. Approximately 1 in 8000 was deflected through more than 90°.
Momentum conservation dictates that this is only possible if scattering is from something more massive than the
alpha particle itself.
Evidence
Conclusion
Angle of
deflection/
degrees
0-10
Most of the atom is empty space.
10-90
Most alpha particles pass straight
through with little deviation.
Some alpha particles deflected through
a large angle.
A few alpha particles are repelled back
towards the source side of the foil.
90-180
A large concentration of charge in one
place.
Most of the mass of the atom and a large
concentration of charge is in a tiny, central
nucleus.
table A Alpha particle scattering observations and conclusions.
8.1
Chadwick's discovery of the neutron
Rutherford determined that most of the atom's mass and all the positive charge was held in a very
small nucleus in the centre, and that electrons were at the edge of the atom. The difference between
the nuclear mass and the known number of protons in it caused a problem though. Nuclei were too
massive for the number of protons they contained. Rutherford suggested that additional proton-
electron pairs, bound together, formed the extra mass in the nucleus.
In 1930, Irene Joliot-Curie and her husband, Frederic, found that alpha particles striking beryllium
would cause it to give off an unknown radiation. Difficult to detect, this unknown, uncharged
radiation could knock protons out of paraffin and these were detected by a Geiger-Müller tube.
The Joliot-Curies tried to explain the unknown radiation as gamma rays, but as these rays have
no mass, this was a breach of the conservation of momentum. James Chadwick repeated the
experiments (fig D) using other target materials as well as paraffin. By considering momentum
transfer and conservation of kinetic energy in the collisions between the particles, Chadwick
concluded that the beryllium radiation was a neutral particle which had a mass about 1% more than
that of a proton. In 1932, he published a proposal for the existence of this new particle, which he
called a neutron, and in 1935 he was awarded the Nobel Prize for this discovery
to vacuum pump
paraffin
detector
neutrons
protons
polonium beryllium
fig D Chadwick's experiment to determine the existence of the neutron relied on the conservation of momentum to
work out the mass of this neutral particle.
Nuclear structure
As we have seen, the nucleus contains two types of particles: protons and neutrons. Collectively,
these particles, when in a nucleus, are known as nucleons. The number of protons in a nucleus
determines which element the atom will be. The periodic table is a list of the elements ordered
according to the number of protons in each atom's nucleus. This number is called the proton
number or the atomic number (Z). The number of neutrons can vary, and we call atoms of the
same element with different numbers of neutrons, isotopes. For small nuclei, up to about atomic
number 20 (which is calcium), the number of neutrons in the nucleus is generally equal to the number
of protons.
Above atomic number 20, to be stable, more neutrons than protons are generally needed in the
nucleus. The neutrons help to bind the nucleus together as they exert a strong nuclear force on
other nucleons, and they act as a space buffer between the mutually repelling positive charges of
the protons. This buffering action means that as we progress through the periodic table to larger and
larger nuclei, proportionately more and more neutrons are needed. By the time we reach the very
biggest nuclei, there can be over 50% more neutrons than protons.
To describe any given nucleus, we must say how many protons and how many neutrons there are.
Thus the chemical symbol written below refers to the isotope of radium, which has 88 protons and
138 neutrons:
226D
88Ra
The number 226, called the nucleon number or the mass number (A), refers to the total number
of nucleons - neutrons and protons - in a nucleus of this isotope. So to find the number of neutrons,
we must subtract the atomic number from the mass number: 226-88 = 138.
8.1
Exam-style questions
[Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
12mE'
, where
1 Electrons are accelerated from rest to a kinetic energy of
2.50 keV.
(a) Calculate the potential difference that the electrons were
accelerated through.
A 2.50 V
B 2500 V
C 1.56 x 1019V
D 1.56 x 1022 V
(b) Calculate the energy of these electrons in joules.
A 4.00 x 10-19 J
B 4.00 x 10-16 J
C 1.56 x 1019 J
D 1.56 X 1022 J
[1]
[Total: 2]
*4 Rutherford designed an experiment to see what happened
when alpha particles were directed at a piece of gold foil.
Summarise the observations and state the conclusions that
Rutherford reached about the structure of gold atoms. [5]
[Total: 5]
2
5 The de Broglie wave equation can be written A =
m is the mass of a particle and Ek is its kinetic energy.
(a) Derive this equation. Use the list of equations provided on
the formulae sheet (Appendix 8 of the specification). [2]
(b) An electron is accelerated through a potential difference
of 2500 V.
Using the equation 1 = 1 , calculate the de Broglie
wavelength of this electron.
[3]
[Total: 5]
2 Calculate the speed of electrons which have a kinetic energy
of 3000 eV.
A 7.39 x 10-14 ms -1
B 2.30 X 107ms-1
C 3.25 x 10'ms
D 1.05 x 1015 ms-1
[Total: 1]
6 The electron in a hydrogen atom can be described by a
stationary wave which is confined within the atom. This means
that the de Broglie wavelength associated with it must be
similar to the size of the atom, which is of the order of 10-10 m.
(a) (i) Calculate the speed of an electron whose de Broglie
wavelength is 1.00 X 10-10 m.
(ii) Calculate the kinetic energy of this electron in
electronvolts.
(b) When B radiation was first discovered, it was suggested that
there were electrons in the atomic nucleus, but it was soon
realised that this was impossible because the energy of
such an electron would be too great.
Explain why an electron confined within a nucleus would
have a much greater energy than the energy calculated
in (a)(ii)
[2]
[Total: 8]
3 Heating a metal wire can cause electrons to escape from the
metal. This process is called:
A electron excitation
B fluorescence
C the photoelectric effect
D thermionic emission.
[Total: 1]
90
TOPIC 8
Nuclear and particle physics
CHAPTER
8.1 Probing matter
Introduction
Throughout history, people have been trying to work out what everything is made from. The ancient Greek philosopher
WP
Democritus wondered how many times a piece of cheese could be cut smaller and smaller, until we reach the point
where the cheese remaining is a fundamental unit that will not split. This was the basis of the theory that everything is
made from indivisible fundamental particles.
In the late nineteenth century, the atom was considered indivisible, but then the English physicist J.J. Thomson demonstrated
that electrons could be removed, so the atom must be made of smaller pieces. This led to some of the most important
experiments of the twentieth century: Rutherford's alpha particle scattering experiments from 1909, which led to the
development of the idea that an atom has a small central nucleus and outer orbiting electrons.
In this chapter, both the transmission of free electrons in a beam, and the details of Rutherford's alpha particle scattering
experiment will be explained. Using particle beams as probes to investigate the detailed substructure of matter is one of the
most important areas of physics study, and in future chapters we will see how these experiments were the precursors for the
very latest developments in particle physics experimentation.
All the maths you need
• Recognising and use of appropriate units (e.g. the electronvolt)
• Use of standard form (e.g. calculating electron energies)
• Use of an appropriate number of significant figures (e.g. calculating electron velocities)
• Changing the subject of non-linear equations (e.g. calculating electron velocities)
• Substituting numerical values into equations using appropriate units (e.g. calculating de Broglie wavelengths)
80
What have I studied before?
• Kinetic energy
Electric current as the movement of electrons
Voltage as a measure of the energy transferred by
charges
Wave-particle duality, including electron
diffraction
The electronvolt
Momentum conservation and elastic collisions
The effects of electric fields on the movements of
charged particles
• Coulomb's law for electrostatic forces
What will I study later?
The structure and functioning of particle
accelerators
The detection and identification of subatomic
particles
• Deeper matter-probing experiments
The processes in which alpha particles are emitted
What will I study in this chapter?
• Alpha particle deflections from nuclei
Rutherford's conclusion from alpha scattering
experiments
The process of thermionic emission
Electron beam acceleration
Applications of electron diffraction and the de
Broglie wavelength
81
8.1
1
A nuclear atom
--400 BCE
Democritus was the
first to suggest the
existence of atoms.
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• describe what is meant by nucleon number (mass number) and
proton number (atomic number)
explain how large angle alpha particle scattering gives
evidence for a nuclear atom
• describe how our understanding of atomic structure has
changed over time
1803
Dalton's model of the atom.
Dalton determined atoms are
distinguished by their masses
and can be combined to produce
compound molecules.
+
+
1906
+
+
Thomson's plum pudding
model of the atom. Negative
electrons are scattered through
a positive "dough'.
Atomic theories through history
Mankind has long wondered about what the materials around us are
fundamentally made out of. There have been many philosophers
and scientists, from Democritus in the fifth century BCE to Dalton in
the early nineteenth century, who have suggested the idea of a tiny
indivisible particle from which everything else is constructed. The
basic model for one of these 'atoms' - which was published in a paper
by Dalton in 1803 - is simply a hard solid sphere. When Thomson
discovered that tiny negatively charged bits (electrons) could be
removed from an atom, leaving behind a positively charged ion, he
produced the 'plum pudding model'. This has the main body of
the atom being composed of a nebulous positively charged material
(the pudding 'dough") with electrons (the 'plums") randomly scattered
through it. This model was successful at explaining the evidence
available at that time. It was superseded in 1911 by Rutherford's
model of the atom, which has a tiny, charged nucleus carrying
most of the mass of the atom, surrounded at some distance by the
electrons, with most of the atom as empty space. Niels Bohr later
refined the nuclear model to have the electrons located around the
nucleus in fixed orbits, following the emerging theory of quantised
energy. Electrons could move from one fixed orbit to another
depending on the energy they gained or lost, but other than these
fixed jumps, they were stuck in an orbit. Bohr's model generated the
commonly used analogy of the atom as being like a miniature Solar
System. This idea is not a perfect model – it is incorrect in many
aspects - but most models have strengths and weaknesses. It is often
necessary to use models in science and we must always be careful to
work within the limitations of any model we use.
1911
Rutherford's nuclear model of the
atom: a large amount of charge and
most of the mass is concentrated
in a tiny central nucleus. Most of
the atom is empty space, and
electrons orbit at the edge.
1913
Bohr's model of the atom
limited electrons to certain
fixed energy orbits, which
they could jump between.
Alpha particle scattering
Between 1909 and 1911, Geiger and Marsden, students of Lord
Rutherford at Manchester University, undertook an experiment
in which they aimed alpha particles at an extremely thin gold foil
(fig B).
Their expectation was that all the alpha particles would pass
through, possibly with a little deviation. The results generally
followed this pattern - the vast majority passed straight through.
However, a few alpha particles had their trajectories deviated by
quite large angles. Some were even repelled back the way they
fig A Models of the atom through history.
had come. Rutherford commented, 'It was almost as incredible as if
you had fired a 15 inch (artillery shell at a piece of tissue paper and it
came back and hit you.' It was a shocking result based on the model
of the atom at that time. Having repeated the results hundreds of
times, the only conclusion that Rutherford could come to was that
to explain the results it was necessary to change the model of the
atom. He developed a model with a small nucleus in the centre of
the atom which contained a large amount of charge and most of
the mass of the atom (see fig C and table A).
82
