8.3
4
Particle reactions
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
use the laws of conservation of charge, baryon number and lepton number to determine
whether a particle interaction is possible
.write and interpret particle equations given the relevant particle symbols
. describe situations in which the relativistic increase in particle lifetime is significant
Reactions conserve properties
In order for any particle reaction to occur, the overall reaction must conserve various properties of the
particles involved. The total combination of mass/energy must be the same before and after the reaction.
Furthermore, momentum and charge must also be conserved. Momentum and mass/energy are difficult
to check up on. A reaction can overcome any apparent mass difference by having the particles begin
or end with more kinetic energy to make up the difference. This is essentially how accelerator collision
experiments can create large mass particles: particles with high kinetic energies can have the energy
converted into mass to generate a host of particles with less energy. Reactions can also have similar
flexibility to ensure momentum conservation. We will see later that particles are also assigned values
called baryon number and lepton number, and these must also be conserved in reactions.
Charge conservation
Charge must be conserved for any particle interaction to be possible. We can quickly see if charge
is conserved by checking the reaction's equation. Consider two common nuclear reactions: alpha
decay and beta-minus decay (fig A).
alpha decay 23 U = 230 Th + ja
charge: +92 +90 + +2 ✓
beta-minus decay C = TN + -93 +7
charge
+6 +7 + -1 + 0
The reaction for beta-minus decay led to the development of the theory that neutrinos and anti-
neutrinos exist. They are almost massless and have no charge, so are almost impossible to detect.
Alpha decay uranium-235
thorium-231
alpha particle
2 protons
2 neutrons
92 protons
143 neutrons
90 protons
141 neutrons
Beta-minus decay
carbon-14
nitrogen-14
electron
anti-neutrino
6 protons
8 neutrons
7 protons
7 neutrons
fig A Alpha and beta decay conserve mass/energy and charge.
116
The particle zoo
| 8.3
Questions
Learning tip
The examination specification for the exchange bosons is limited to
photons only.
What is the difference in the quark composition of a proton and
a neutron? Explain what you think happens to the quarks when a
neutron undergoes beta minus decay.
2 What is the difference between:
(a) a meson and a baryon?
(b) a hadron and a lepton?
3 What is an exchange boson?
How do you know that the W+boson cannot be its own anti-
particle?
5
Describe what happens to make a proton repel another proton.
fig C Gluons - in combination with virtual quark anti-quark pairs - are
exchanged between quarks to hold the quarks together. In this example, the
three quarks form a proton.
Look at the boson mass column in table A. Why was it only
in recent years that the weak nuclear force bosons could be
experimentally confirmed?
It may sound bizarre, but this has been shown experimentally to
be an appropriate model for the electromagnetic, strong and weak
forces. In the case of gravity, the so-called graviton has been
theoretically invented to complete the model, but gravitons are yet
to be discovered. Many experiments have been set up recently to
try and detect gravitons.
Force
Exchange
boson
Boson
symbol
Boson
charge
Boson
mass
(GeV/c2)
electromagnetic
weak nuclear
photon
Wor Z boson
SINO
80.4
80.4
91.2
Kev definitions
Baryon is a particle made of a combination of three quarks.
Meson is a particle made of a combination of a quark and an
anti-quark.
A pion is a meson created from any combination of up and down
quark/anti-quark pairings.
A kaon is a meson created from any combination of an up or down
quark/anti-quark and a strange or anti-strange quark
A hadron is a particle which can interact via the strong nuclear force.
Exchange bosons are particles that enable the transfer of force.
Each of the four fundamental forces has its own exchange boson.
Gravity is the weakest of the four fundamental forces, transmitted by
the (theoretical) graviton particle, and affecting all objects.
The electromagnetic force is one of the four fundamental forces,
transmitted by photons, acting between objects with charges.
The strong nuclear force is the strongest of the four fundamental
forces, transmitted by gluons acting at very short ranges (10-15 m)
between hadrons.
The weak nuclear force is one of the four fundamental forces,
transmitted by Wor Z bosons, acting at extremely short ranges
(10-18 m); it can affect all matter particles.
Photons are the quantum of electromagnetic radiation, and force
carrier for the electromagnetic force.
A graviton is the force carrier particle (or exchange boson) for
gravity.
strong nuclear gluon
gravity
graviton
undetermined
table A The four forces of nature and their exchange bosons.
Evidence for exchange bosons
Whilst gravity is the force we experience most obviously, it
WP) is the one scientists know the least detail about. The
electromagnetic force is well understood, and the
exchange of photons to make it work has also led to an
understanding of the generation of photons such as light. The
weak nuclear force is also fairly well understood, as the W and Z
bosons predicted by theory have since been detected in
accelerator experiments in which protons are crashed together.
This is particularly strong science, as the existence of the weak
nuclear force bosons had been theoretically predicted and then
they were detected in later experiments. Many particle decays
where other particles are formed, such as beta decay, occur via a
weak nuclear force interaction.
115
The particle zoo
8.3
Questions
For each of these reactions, confirm whether or not they can occur considering only conservation
of charge:
(a) phosphorus beta-plus decay.
The phosphorus isotope is converted into a sulfur isotope and emits a positron and an electron
neutrino:
1P+ S+.98 + Owe
(b) neutral pion decay.
A neutral pion becomes an electron, a positron and a gamma photon:
70 € + et + 7
2 Amuon is generated in the atmosphere at a height of 10 km. Calculate how far it would travel down
towards the ground if it was moving at 0.98 c and it decays after 2.2 10-s.
Beta plus decay is similar to the better known beta-minus decay. In beta-plus decay, a proton is converted
into a neutron, with the emission of a positron and an electron neutrino.
Write the fundamental reaction for beta-plus decay and confirm that it is permitted by the conservation
rules you have seen.
4 One theoretical physicist at CERN has proposed that the LHC may see a neutron decay reaction in which
a lambda zero particle (up, down, strange baryon) and a kaon (down/anti-strange meson) are produced:
proposed reaction 1 in A+OK
A second theoretical physicist at CERN has argued that the reaction will have to produce two kaons as
well as a positron and an anti-neutrino:
proposed reaction 2n=A+2K+ et +
Work out which reaction, if any, is possible.
Key definitions
Alpha decay is the radioactive process in which a particle combination of two protons and two neutrons
is ejected from a nucleus.
Beta-minus decay is the radioactive process in which a nuclear neutron changes into a proton, and an
electron is ejected from the nucleus.
A baryon number is the quantum number for baryons, whereby each proton or neutron (or other baryon)
has a value of B = 1.
A lepton number is the quantum number for leptons, whereby each lepton has a value of L= 1.
Strangeness is the quantum number for strange quarks, whereby each one has a value of S = -1.
119
The particle zoo
| 8.3
Only the first three quarks - up, down and strange - were known from the middle part of the twentieth
century, and the charm quark was discovered in 1974. The symmetry of the Standard Model indicated
to scientists that there were other particles they had never observed, which should exist - the bottom
and top quark Experiments were carried out to find these and the accelerator experiments at Fermilab
discovered bottom in 1977 and top in 1995.
Current particle theory holds that all matter in the Universe is constructed from combinations of
some of these 12 particles, and no others. Each of the 12 particles listed in tables A and B also has
an anti-particle. The anti-particles have the same mass but all their other properties are opposite to
those of the normal matter particle. To write the symbol for an anti-particle, it is the same as the
normal particle, with a bar above the symbol. For example, the charge on an anti-down quark is +
and its symbol is d. In a few cases, the anti-particle notation treats it as a different particle in its own
right and the bar may not be used. The positron (anti-electron) does not use a bar but is written as et.
Did you know?
The Higgs boson
One of the aims for CERN's Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiment was that it would discover the Higgs
boson. This was theoretically suggested independently by both Peter Higgs and the team of Francois
Englert and Robert Brout, in 1964. Itself very massive, the Higgs particle is the means by which particles get
mass. Remember that one of the key points about mass is that it gives objects inertia - the reluctance to
change velocity. Thus, an electron suffers less of this effect from the Higgs field than a proton, and so it has
less mass. The Higgs mechanism - how this field imparts mass - is not easy to describe in everyday terms.
On 4 July 2012, two LHC experiment teams, ATLAS and CMS, jointly announced that they had discovered a
particle which matched the predicted interactions of the Higgs boson, and the mass of this new particle
was approximately 125 GeV/c2. Whilst the LHC scientists were reluctant to confirm it as the Higgs boson at
the time, the new particle discovery was good enough for Higgs and Englert to be jointly awarded the
2013 Nobel Prize in Physics. Brout had unfortunately died a year before the experimental discovery was
confirmed.
Questions
| An anti-electron is called a positron. Why is it usually written with the symbol et?
2 What is the difference between:
(a) a quark and a lepton? (b) a quark and an anti-quark? (c) an electron and a muon?
3 (a) Having discovered up, down, strange, charm and bottom quarks, why did scientists undertake similar
experiments using higher and higher energies?
(b) The properties of the top quark that they discovered are shown in table B. What properties would an
anti-top quark have?
4
Look at fig A and consider the three generations of neutrino, compared with the other fundamental particles
in the Standard Model.
(a) Why are the masses of the neutrinos surprising?
(b) How do the neutrinos' masses follow the same trends as the other particles in the three generations?
Kev definitions
Standard Model is the name given to the theory of all the fundamental particles and how they interact.
This is the theory that currently has the strongest experimental evidence.
Quarks are the six fundamental particles that interact with each other using the strong nuclear force (as
well as all other forces).
Leptons are the six fundamental particles which do not interact using the strong nuclear force, only the
other three fundamental forces.
The strong nuclear force is an extremely short range force between hadrons (such as protons and
neutrons).
For each particle there exists an anti-particle, which has the same mass but all their other properties are
opposite to those of the normal matter particle.
113
8.3
3
Particles and forces
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define baryons, mesons and photons in the Standard Model
• explain why high energies are required to investigate
fundamental particles
speeds, so was a genuine and unexpected long lifetime. This did
not fit the pattern generated by up, down and strange quarks, and
it is thought to be a charm-anti-charm combination (CC). The two
independent discoverers of this, Richter and Ting, shared the 1976
Nobel Prize for their discovery of the fourth quark.
Baryons
If three quarks are combined together, the resulting particle is
a baryon (fig A). Protons and neutrons are baryons. A proton
consists of two up quarks and a down quark, whilst a neutron is
two down quarks combined with an up quark. Other baryons are
more obscure and have very short lives, as they decay through a
strong nuclear force reaction that makes them highly unstable. Yet
other baryons, like the sigma, omega and lambda particles, decay
via the weak nuclear force and are longer lived, with lives as long
as 10-10 seconds!
fig B Mesons are formed from quark-anti-quark combinations.
proton
anti-proton
Hadrons
Quarks can interact via the strong nuclear force. Thus baryons
and mesons can interact via the strong nuclear force. Any particle
which feels the strong force is called a hadron. So, baryons and
mesons are both hadrons. Leptons do not feel the strong force and
so are in a separate class of particle from the hadrons.
neutron
lambda-zero
fig A Three-quark baryons. Three anti-quarks in the anti-proton make it an
anti-baryon.
Mesons
If a quark and an anti-quark are combined together, the resulting
particle is known as a meson (fig B). The pion and the kaon are
the most common examples of mesons. A m meson (ud) is made
from an up quark (u) combined with an anti-down (d) quark. If a
meson is a combination of a quark and its anti-quark, then the
meson's charge must be zero. This is the case for the J/u particle,
which was first discovered in 1974 by two independent researchers
at separate laboratories. Its slow decay, with a lifetime of
7.2 x 10-21s, occurred when it was not travelling at relativistic
114
The four forces of the apocalypse
There are four other particles that we have not yet mentioned
here, because they are not matter particles. These are known
together as exchange bosons. The matter particles interact by
the four forces of nature, which are gravity, the electromagnetic
force, the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force.
Each force acts on particles which have a certain property
such as mass in the case of gravity, or electric charge for the
electromagnetic force. The process by which these forces act has
been modelled by scientists as an exchange of another type of
particles - the exchange bosons. For example, for a proton and
an electron to attract each other's opposite charge, they pass
photons backwards and forwards between each other.
THINKING
BIGGER
ANTI-MATTER MATTERS m
Anti-matter was first proposed by Paul Dirac in 1928, and has long enjoyed a significant level of
interest from science fiction writers and scientists alike, due to its elusive esoteric nature.
Here, NASA's outreach activities include an explanation of the progress that has been made towards
harnessing the potential of anti-matter.
STATUS OF ANTI-MATTER
Technology is now being explored to make anti-matter carrying
cases, to consider using anti-matter for medical purposes, and to
consider how to make anti-matter rockets.
CONJECTURE) SPECULATION)SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY)APPLICATION
HNI
fig A The maturity of a scientific concept changes over time.
Anti-matter is real stuff, not just science fiction. Anti-matter is
firmly in the realm of science with some aspects even entering the
technology realm. There is also a lot of speculation about what one
might do with anti-matter.
What is anti-matter?
Anti-matter is matter with its electrical charge reversed. Anti-
electrons, called "positrons,' are like an electron but with a positive
charge. Antiprotons are like protons with a negative charge.
Positrons, antiprotons and other antiparticles can be routinely
created at particle accelerator labs, such as CERN in Europe, and
can even be trapped and stored for days or weeks at a time. And
just last year, they made antihydrogen for the first time. It didn't
last long, but they did it. Also, anti-matter is NOT antigravity.
Although it has not been experimentally confirmed, existing theory
predicts that anti-matter behaves the same to gravity as does
normal matter.
The catch?
Right now it would cost about one-hundred-billion dollars to
create one milligram of anti-matter. One milligram is way beyond
what is needed for research purposes, but that amount would be
needed for large scale applications. To be commercially viable, this
price would have to drop by about a factor of ten-thousand.
And what about using anti-matter for power generation? - not
promising.
It costs far more energy to create anti-matter than the energy one
could get back from an anti-matter reaction. Right now standard
nuclear reactors, which take advantage of the decay of radioactive
substances, are far more promising as power generating
technology than anti-matter. Something to keep in mind, too, is
that anti-matter reactions - where anti-matter and normal matter
collide and release energy, require the same safety precautions as
needed with nuclear reactions.
Extract from the NASA website, at http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/
technology/warp/antistat.html posted on 2 May 2008
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1 6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
120
8.3
2
The particle zoo
Generation
Name
Symbol Charge Mass (GeV/c?)
0.0023
up
down
0.0048
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define leptons and quarks in the Standard Model
• describe that the symmetry of the Standard Model predicted
the existence of top quark
explain that every particle has an anti-particle
deduce the properties of particles and their anti-particles
strange
0.095
charm
1.275
bottom
4.19
| TIL
top
table B The family of quarks. These are subject to the strong nuclear force.
fermions
10
top quark
bottom quark
charm quark
The Standard Model
After a century in which scientists rapidly discovered many sub-
atomic particles, they have now established a theory for how
these come together to build up the things we see around us.
This theory is known as the Standard Model. As the idea of the
atom as indivisible was swept aside by Rutherford and Thomson,
so the idea of the proton and neutron as fundamental has also
been overturned. We have probed inside these two nucleons and
discovered that each is constructed from smaller particles known
as quarks. The electron has so far survived as being considered
fundamental. However, it has two partners - similar types of
particles - and each has a neutrino associated with it, forming a
group of six fundamental particles, known as leptons.
Scientists like to see the Universe as balanced, or symmetrical,
and we have now found that quarks are also a group of six,
although only the lightest two are found in protons and neutrons.
The heavier quarks are found in rarer particles. The two groups
are distinct because quarks can undergo interactions via the
strong nuclear force, whereas leptons do not feel the strong
force. It is the strong nuclear force that binds nucleons together
in the nucleus. In each group of six there are three pairs with a
similar order of magnitude for mass, and these are known as the
three generations of matter (fig A).
Hall
strange quark
10-1
muon
down quark
Mass/GeV
up quark
Generation
ge Mass (MeV/c)
0.511
electron
electron
electron
neutrino
0
0
(<2.2 x 10)
muon
-1
0
106
(<0.17)
muon
neutrino
0
10-10
tau
tau neutrino
1780
0(<20)
tau-neutrino
of
0
muon-neurino
10-11
table A The family of leptons. These do not feel the strong nuclear force.
electron-neutrino
10-12 L
fig A The masses of particles in the Standard Model increase over generations.
112
8.3
Here, we again see that this reaction must have an anti-lepton on the right-hand side to balance the
electron, and thus we have further evidence for the suggestion that an anti-neutrino is produced.
If we zoom in further and isolate the individual quark decay reaction in beta decay, we can check
again:
beta-minus decayd → u + -18 + 8
charge:
- + + - 1 + 0 ✓
baryon number: + + + + 0 + 0
lepton number: 0 + 0 + +1 + -1 ✓
Again, everything is conserved.
+
+
Strangeness
The strange quark adds an additional property to reactions, which must usually also be conserved.
This is called strangeness, S. Each strange quark has a strangeness of -1, each anti-strange
quark has S = +1, and all other particles have zero strangeness. Strong and electromagnetic force
interactions must conserve strangeness.
WORKED EXAMPLE
The lambda-plus particle is a baryon and consists of two up quarks and a strange quark (uus). It
commonly decays via the strong force into a proton (uud) and a neutral pion (which can be ud or dd).
True or false?
proposed decay A = P +
charge
+1 + 0
baryon number: +1 → +1 + 0 ✓
lepton number: 0 = 0 + 0 ✓
strangeness: -1 = 0 + 0 X
†
†
This reaction cannot occur via a strong force as it does not conserve strangeness.
Relativistic lifetimes
We have seen previously (Section 8.2.1) that when a particle is accelerated to a significant fraction
of the speed of light, its mass appears to increase. Einstein also predicted that, at these speeds,
time would be slower than it is for an external observer. This would suggest that for us monitoring
very fast-moving particles, their lifetimes before they decay would be longer than the theoretical
predictions.
One early piece of evidence of these extended particle lifetimes came with the detection of muons
at sea level. High energy cosmic rays interact with the nuclei of atoms high in the atmosphere to
create muons, which have a lifetime of about 2 gs. These should all decay in much less than the time
to travel down to the Earth's surface, and we should hardly detect any at sea level. However, they are
detected at low altitudes in significant numbers. The reason is that they are travelling very fast (for
example 0.98c). As far as the muons are concerned, they still decay in the same short time; but for us
as external observers, their time moves slowly enough for them to travel tens of kilometres down to
our experiments on the ground. This phenomenon was first confirmed experimentally by Rossi and
Hall in 1940.
This principle also affects the particle interactions observed in accelerator collision experiments. The
particles live longer, and travel further than we might expect because they are moving so fast. This
allows a host of additional interactions to happen, as they meet particles they might not otherwise
have had time to come into contact with. Also, the fast-moving particles will travel much further
through the detectors than non-relativistic lifetimes would allow, and so can be more easily observed.
If the exotic particles produced in the LHC collision chamber decayed within the chamber before
escaping it, none would be detectable, as the detector cannot be placed right at the collision point.
118
The particle zoo
8.3
If the same nuclear change were producing the same single
particle every time, then for mass-energy to be conserved, the beta
particles would have to have the same energy every time. This is the
case for alpha particles. However, scientists found that beta particles
from nuclei of the same isotope have a range of kinetic energies.
This suggested that another particle was flying away with some
kinetic energy, so that the total kinetic energy produced was always
the same.
WORKED EXAMPLE
For each of these reactions, confirm whether or not they can occur
through conservation of charge:
(a) Beta-plus decay:
N= C+.98 +ve
Answer: +7 +6 + +1 +0 ✓
This reaction is permitted as it conserves charge. It would need to
also conserve mass/energy and momentum.
(b) Positive pion decay:
T = A + 0,
Answer: +1 -1 +0 X
This reaction is not permitted as it does not conserve charge.
(NB: In fact, a positive pion decays into an anti-muon, wt, and a
muon neutrino with a lifetime of some 26 nanoseconds.)
Conservation of baryon and lepton numbers
We can also check on the possibility of a reaction occurring, as
the reaction must conserve baryon number and lepton number.
Each quark has a baryon number, B, of +, and so a baryon has
a value of B = +1. Each lepton has a lepton number, L, of +1.
Anti-particles have the opposite number. As mesons are
quark/anti-quark combinations, their total baryon number is zero
(+ + 3 = 0).
Particle reactions can also only occur if they conserve baryon and
lepton numbers overall. This means the total for each property
must be the same before and after any reaction, or else it cannot
occur.
Let us revisit alpha and beta decay and check on conservation of
these numbers.
alpha decay 2350 = 230Th + ja
charge: +92 + +90 + +2 ✓
baryon number: +235 +231 + +4 ✓
lepton number: 0 + 0 + 0 ✓
beta-minus decay C N + -93 + de
charge:
+6 +7 + -1 + 0
baryon number: +14 +14+ 0 + 0 ✓
lepton number: 0 = 0 + +1 + -1 ✓
If we isolate the individual neutron decay reaction in beta decay,
we can check again:
beta-minus decay in = p +-13 + que
charge:
0 = +1 + -1 + 0 (
baryon number: +1 = +1 + 0 + 0 ✓
lepton number: 0 = 0 + +1 + - 1
Learning tip
The products from beta decay processes include either an electron
(beta minus) or a positron (beta plus). This means that you may see
either symbol for each used in beta decay equations:
03+
98-
Particle
Symbol Charge
Lepton Baryon
number, L number, B
Anti-particle
Symbol Charge
Lepton Baryon
number, L number, B
electron
electron neutrino
muon
muon neutrino
positron
anti-electron neutrino
anti-muon
anti-muon neutrino
-1
tau
-1
0
anti-tau
tau neutrino
anti-tau neutrino
table A Leptons and anti-leptons and their properties.
Particle
Symbol Charge
Anti-particle
Symbol Charge
Lepton Baryon
number, L number, B
proton
Lepton Baryon
number, L number, B
+1
0
+1
0
0
-1
neutron
neutral pion
0
0
anti-proton
anti-neutron
neutral pion
anti-pi-plus
anti-down
xi-plus
12 ET EI [1]
pi-plus
down quark
xi-minus
table B Various particles and anti-particles, and their properties.
117
The particle zoo
8.3
(b) A scientist observes a similar event in a detector and the
incoming photon had a frequency of 4.89 x 1020 Hz. She sees
the tracks of the electron and positron from the reaction are
160° apart and hypothesises that a third particle must be
produced. Calculate the mass of this third particle in MeV/c2.
Electronvolt units
We have seen (in Book 1 Section 3.1.2) the electronvolt (eV)
as a unit for very small amounts of energy. Remember that one
electronvolt is the amount of energy gained by an electron when
it is accelerated through a potential difference of one volt. This
is equivalent to 1.6 x 10-19 joules, so it is a very small amount
of energy, even in particle physics terms. It is common for
particles to have millions or even billions of electronvolts. For this
reason we often use MeV and GeV as units of energy in particle
interactions.
Look at fig B, which shows tracks in a hydrogen bubble chamber
that has been bombarded with anti-protons. One anti-proton hits
a proton in the chamber. The resulting tracks show the tracks of
various pairs of particles (17+/", e*/e) which are created in the
collision.
Similarly, the atomic mass unit, u, is not an SI unit but is
commonly used in particle interactions, as it is often easier to get
to grips with. lu= 1.67 x 10-27 kg. As we know that energy and
mass are connected by the equation AE = c2Am, we can also have
mass units which are measures of E/c2, such as MeV/c2 and
GeV/c2.1 u of mass is equivalent to about 931.5 MeV/c2.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Calculate the mass in kilograms of 1 MeV/c2
1 MeV = 1 x 106 x 1.6 x 10-19 = 1.6 x 10-13)
In Sl units, c = 3 x 108m 5-7
1 MeV/c2 - 1.6 x 10-13
(3 * 10%)
1 MeV/c2= 1.78 x 10-30 kg
This is about twice the mass of an electron.
Learning tip
No particle interactions can occur if they violate any of these
conservation rules:
. momentum
fig B Tracks in a hydrogen bubble chamber that has been bombarded with
anti-protons.
(a) Identify the incoming anti-proton track.
(b) How did you identify the incoming anti-proton? What does
this tell you about its kinetic energy compared to the resulting
particles?
(c) How does the picture illustrate the conservation of matter/
energy?
(d) Identify any pair of particles (eg., et/e). How do you know that
the tracks show you a pair of identical but opposite particles?
(e) How does the picture illustrate conservation of charge?
(f) How does the picture illustrate the conservation of momentum
in two dimensions?
• mass-energy
charge.
There are also other rules that must be obeyed, but these three are
critical, as all particles involved will have some of each property.
Questions
A positron with kinetic energy 2.2 MeV collides with an electron at
rest, and they annihilate each other.
(a) Calculate the energy of each of the two identical gamma
photons produced as a result of the annihilation.
(b) Calculate the frequency of these gamma photons.
Kev definitions
Pair production is the phenomenon in which a particle and its
anti-matter equivalent are both created simultaneously in a
conversion from energy.
Annihilation is the phenomenon in which a particle and its
anti-matter equivalent are both destroyed simultaneously in a
conversion into energy which is carried away by force carrier
particles, such as photons.
The electronvolt is the amount of energy an electron gains by
passing through a voltage of 1 V.
1 eV = 1.6x 10-19] 1 mega electronvolt = 1 MeV = 1.6 x 10-13)
2
In 1977, in an accelerator at Fermilab, the upsilon particle was
discovered. Its mass was determined as 9.46 GeV/c2. What is the
mass of the upsilon particle in kilograms?
A gamma ray photon travelling through space spontaneously
converts into an electron and a positron.
(a) Explain why the two new particles must move in opposite
directions to each other.
111
Thinking Bigger
8.3
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this webpage:
1. a. What sort of people do you think might visit this webpage?
b. How has the author ensured that the level of scientific terminology, and the depth of
explanations, are right for their audience?
2. What is NASA's motivation for including this page on its website?
UVUV100
Consider NASA's general
purposes and aims. You
may find it helpful to visit
the original webpage and
look at close links to it.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
3. What would be the structure of anti-hydrogen?
4. a. How could a particle physics lab trap, or store, a charged particle like a proton for a
long time?
b. How would CERN store the positrons they create?
c. Why would it be much more difficult to store anti-hydrogen than an anti-proton?
5. a. What are the differences between an electron and a positron?
b. What differences are there between an anti-baryon and an anti-lepton?
c. Why is it generally unnecessary to define a group of particles we would call
anti-mesons?
6. Using the data given in the extract (and assuming ordinary matter is free) calculate the
cost per joule of energy created if anti-matter annihilation were to be used for power
generation
7. a. If a positron beam were to be used as an annihilation cutting tool, calculate the beam
current that would deliver 100 kW.
b. What voltage would be needed to accelerate a beam of electrons so that, at the same
beam current, it could deliver the same power from mechanical collisions with the
target?
1000W
Consider the movement
of positrons in a beam as
an electric current, which
annihilate with the target
to deliver the energy.
000000
Activity
The webpage was published in 2008 and the study of anti-matter is progressing quickly. Write an updated
version of the webpage for your nearest university physics department to include on their site. The
purpose of the webpage, as far as the university is concerned, is to explain anti-matter to students who
may be considering applying to study physics there. You do not need to mention any activities that the
department are involved with, the page should simply inspire and interest students into the possibilities
that a career in physics could offer. The level of scientific explanation should be a little deeper than the
NASA original shown.
You will need to do some
further research in order
to find out the latest
developments and areas
of research, in order
to make your webpage
fully up to date. For
example, has the cost
of making one milligram
of anti-matter changed
Since 2008?
8.2
8.3
YOU ARE
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
HERE
121
8.3
Exam-style questions
[Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
With reference to the diagram, explain the evidence
provided for this event.
[Total: 4]
1 Which of the following is NOT a possible value for the charge
on a meson?
A -1
B 0
*5 In 1961 Murray Gell-Mann predicted the existence of a new
particle called an omega (2) minus. It was subsequently
discovered in 1964.
At this time the quark model consisted of three particles, the
properties of which are given in the table.
D1
[1]
[Total: 1]
80
2 Which of the following is a lepton?
A A baryon
B An electron neutrino
C A neutral pi meson
D A proton
[1]
[Total: 1]
3 'Positron' is the name for an anti-electron. The properties of the
positron are:
Answer
A
-1
Mass/kg
-9.11 X 10-31
-9.11 x 10-31
9.11 X 10-31
9.11 X 10-31
Lepton number Charge
0
+1
+1
L 0
-1
B
Quark Charge Predicted mass in MeV/c2
Up (u)
Down (d)
Strange (s)
(a) Explain what a charge of + means.
(b) State the predicted mass of, and the charge on,
ans particle.
(c) Convert 4 MeV/c2 to kg.
(d) The event that led to the discovery of the omega minus
particle can be summarised as follows. A negative kaon
collided with a stationary proton and produced a positive
kaon, a neutral kaon and the omega minus.
(i) Kaons K consist of either an up or down quark plus
a strange quark. The omega minus consists of three
strange quarks.
Copy and complete the following table by ticking
the appropriate boxes.
Meson Baryon Nucleon Lepton
Negative kaon
Omega minus
(ii) Write an equation using standard particle symbols
to summarise this event.
(iii) The negative kaon consists of us. Deduce the quark
structure of two other kaons involved in this event. [2]
(iv) The total mass of the three particles created after
this event is larger than the total mass of the two
particles before. Discuss the quantities that must be
conserved in interactions between particles and use an
appropriate conservation law to explain this increase
in mass.
[Total: 17]
+1
[1]
[Total: 1]
*4 The diagram shows tracks produced by charged particles in a
bubble chamber
[5]
At X, an incoming charged particle interacts with a stationary
proton to produce a neutral lambda particle and a neutral kaon
particle. Both these particles later decay into other particles.
122
TOPIC 8
Nuclear and particle physics
CHAPTER
8.3
The particle zoo
oxygen a
Introduction
On 4 July 2012, there was a press conference at CERN, the particle physics experiments lab near Geneva, in which they
WP announced the discovery of a particle which they believe is the Higgs boson, predicted in the sixties as the final
component in the Standard Model. Physicists the world over were hugely excited by CERN's discovery, as this is
experimental confirmation of the only piece of the Standard Model that had not previously been confirmed to exist. Moreover,
its mass was very close to a theoretically predicted value. Therefore, the scientific system of subatomic particles was completed,
and experimental evidence of previous predictions is the foundation for the strongest scientific conclusions. This means that
the Standard Model is a very sound theory, and any corrections or alterations are now more likely to be very minor.
In this chapter we will put together the picture of the Standard Model, so that you can see how the few particles you already
know fit into the overall theory. These particles are the fundamental building blocks of our material Universe, and how they
interact is what determines the development and structure of everything there is. Arguably, every phenomenon you will ever
encounter is a consequence of the ideas in this chapter!
All the maths you need
• Recognising and use of appropriate units (e.g. converting joules and electronvolts)
• Use of standard form (e.g. using photon frequencies)
• Considering orders of magnitude (e.g. comparing the different generations of particles)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. calculating photon frequencies)
• Substituting numerical values into equations using appropriate units (eg. calculating matter conversions into energy)
proton
gluon
u p qu
up quark
down a
108
8.3
1
Particle interactions
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
use the equation AE = c-Am in situations involving the
creation and annihilation of matter and anti-matter particles
use and convert between MeV, GeV and
E 16.4 x 10-14
h 6.63 x 10-34
f = 2.47 x 1020 Hz
This reaction is known as electron-positron pair production.
In momentum terms, it is just like an explosion. Initially only
the photon existed so there was some linear momentum. Along
this initial direction, their components of momentum must sum
to the same total as the photon had. Perpendicular to the initial
momentum, the electron and positron produced must have equal
and opposite components of momentum so that in this direction
it will still total zero afterwards.
In any reaction, the total combination of matter-energy must be
conserved. If we add the energy equivalent of all matter particles
with the energies, before and after the reaction, the numbers must
be equal.
Creation
'In the beginning, God created the Heaven and the Earth.' This
is the first line of the Christian holy book, the Bible. The creation
story of the indigenous people of Australia claims that everything
was created from the dreams of their distant ancestors. Hinduism
has several accounts of creation, one being that everything was
magically created by Brahma, under the instruction of Vishnu,
who had just been awakened from dreaming by the primordial
sound. Some native Americans hold to the idea that 'Earthmaker
wished for the Earth and it was formed."
The implication from most creation stories is that, from
nothing, the material of the Earth was brought into being by
an unexplained entity. Some scientists take such apparently
supernatural whimsy as strong evidence that religion is fanciful
nonsense. However, one of Einstein's most important theories
seemingly suggests exactly this - matter can appear where
previously there was nothing but energy. Matter and energy
are regularly interchanged in the Universe according to his
well-known equation, E = mc2. In this equation, multiplying the
mass of an object by the square of the speed of light gives the
equivalent amount of energy:
AE = (2x Am
Given a suitable quantity of energy, such as that in a gamma
ray photon, particles can spontaneously appear and the energy
disappears from existence. This is so commonplace in the
Universe that it should not surprise us. The reason it does is that
these events only happen on a sub-atomic scale, so we cannot
detect them without complex machinery
WORKED EXAMPLE
Annihilation
Just as matter can appear spontaneously through a conversion
from energy, so energy can appear through the disappearance of
mass. This is the source of energy in nuclear fission and fusion.
In both reactions, the sum of the masses of all matter involved
before the reaction is greater than the sum of all mass afterwards.
This mass difference is converted into energy (see Section
10.1.3). In a nuclear power station we extract this energy as heat
and use it to drive turbines to generate electricity.
If a particle and its anti-particle meet (anti-particles are the
anti-matter versions of regular particles – see Section 8.3.2).
they will spontaneously vanish from existence to be replaced
by the equivalent energy: we call this interaction annihilation
This reaction was supposedly the main power source to drive the
starship Enterprise in the science fiction series Star Trek (fig A).
It is not commonly suggested that annihilation reactors could be
used as a power source on Earth, as anti-matter exists so rarely.
Also, if we could find a supply of anti-matter, it would annihilate
on contact with any matter, which would most likely be before it
reached the reaction chamber we had set up to extract the energy
for conversion into electricity.
Agamma ray photon converts into an electron and a positron
(an anti-electron that has an identical mass to the electron).
Calculate the frequency of the gamma photon.
Mass of an electron me = 9.11 x 10-31 kg.
AE = 2 x Am = (3 x 108,2x 9.11 x 10-31
AE = 8.2 x 10-14)
This is the amount of energy needed to produce an electron or a
positron so, to produce both, the energy of the photon must be
double this: 16.4 x 10-14].
E = hf
fig A The fictional starship Enterprise was said to be powered by a
matter-anti-matter annihilation reaction.
110
electron
tom
What have I studied before?
The conservation of momentum, charge and
energy
The structure and functioning of linear particle
accelerators
The structure and functioning of circular particle
accelerators
The detection and identification of subatomic
particles
How to interpret particle tracks in particle
detectors
Deeper matter probing experiments, including the
Large Hadron Collider
atomic n. Nuclear fusion
What will I study later?
• The types of nuclear radiation and the reactions
creating them
• Nuclear fission
Nuclear fusion
The importance of particles in stars and between
stars
The interactions of dark matter
neutron
What will I study in this chapter?
The various fundamental particles that have been
discovered
• Interactions between fundamental particles
The four fundamental forces of nature
. What anti-matter is
Further conservation laws for particle interactions
• The Standard Model
neutron
Jark
gluon
up quark
down quark
uark
109
down quark
Exam-style questions
8.3
(ii) The vector diagram shown below is not complete.
Copy the diagram and add arrows to represent the
momenta of J3 and J4.
N
8.-------
[2]
J2
[2]
6 (a) Physicists were able to confidently predict the existence
of a sixth quark State why.
(b) The mass of the top quark was determined by an
experiment. Collisions between protons and anti-protons
occasionally produce two top quarks.
(i) How do the properties of a proton and an anti-proton
compare?
(ii) After the collision the two top quarks move in opposite
directions with the same speed.
Explain why.
(c) The two top quarks decay rapidly into two muons and four
jets of particles. These can be detected and their momenta
measured
The diagram shows an end-on view of the directions of the
four jets (J1 to J4) of particles. The two muons are shown
as y, and u. A muon neutrino is also produced but cannot
be detected, so is not shown. Each momentum is measured
in GeV/c.
The magnitude of the momentum for each particle or 'jet'
is shown by the number printed at the end of each arrow.
Scale: 1 cm represents 10 GeV/c
(iii) Complete the diagram to determine the magnitude
of the momentum of the muon neutrino. [1]
(iv) Show that the total energy of all the products of this
event is about 300 GeV.
(v) Deduce the mass of a top quark in GeV/c2. [1]
(vi) Explain why it took a long time to find experimental
evidence for the top quark
[Total: 14]
[27
34
H
40
19
Scale: 1cm represents 10 GeV/c
(i) Explain why GeV/cis a valid unit for momentum.
[2]
123
