Space
12.1
Dark energy
Until the very end of the twentieth century, it was not known which of the three possible fates of the
Universe (fig A) would happen.
The Hubble Space Telescope was launched in 1990 and its observations of distant supernovae
have shown not only that the expansion of the Universe is not slowing, as we would expect from the
gravitational attractions of all the matter in it, but is actually accelerating. The Universe is getting
larger at a faster and faster rate. What could cause this cosmic acceleration is not yet known, but
it has been called dark energy. All we know about dark energy is how much it is affecting the
expansion of the Universe, and thus what proportion of the Universe it is. It turns out that dark
energy is approximately two-thirds of everything that exists, and we have no idea what it is or how to
observe it.
ordinary matter
4.9%
dark matter
26.8%
dark energy
68.3%
fig F The ordinary matter we can see and feel makes up only about 5% of the Universe. Dark matter is a little over a
quarter of everything, but dark energy is more than two-thirds of the Universe.
Learning tin
Whilst most physicists believe that the as yet unidentified dark matter is the solution to the unobserved
mass, dark energy is much more of a mystery. Some scientists have suggested that by tweaking the
mathematics in the theory of gravity, the unexplained observations could be accounted for. However,
Einstein's gravity theory works so well for many observations that we are not ready to alter it until a better
version is developed.
Questions
I Give two reasons why the exact value of the Hubble constant is difficult to determine.
2 What is the importance of the critical density' of the Universe?
3
Describe two phenomena that have led scientists to believe in the existence of dark matter.
Kev definitions
The Big Crunch is a possible future for the Universe, in which it contracts inwards to a single point.
Dark matter is a material in the Universe that explains some anomalous behaviours of celestial objects, as
yet its nature has not been identified.
Dark energy is a source of a force that is causing the expansion of the Universe to accelerate; as yet its
nature has not been identified.
193
THINKING
BIGGER
DARK UNIVERSE
The European Space Agency selected a mission called Euclid as one to invest in during this decade.
The mission will study dark energy, gravity and dark matter.
The plans for the mission were reported by the children's television programme Newsround, and the
website archive of their coverage is transcribed below.
A NEW TELESCOPE IS GOING INTO SPACE TO
INVESTIGATE THE DARK UNIVERSE
www.
Scientists say these are everywhere in the Universe but they don't
know very much about them.
Dark matter can't be detected itself, but scientists know it's there
because it affects other things we can see in the Universe.
For example, dark matter is the stuff that helps give galaxies their
shape – like scaffolding holding up the shape of a galaxy.
The Euclid telescope will investigate this dark matter by looking at
how it affects light coming through from distant galaxies.
Dark energy on the other hand appears to affect how fast the
Universe is expanding.
So the Euclid telescope will map out how galaxies are spread out
in the Universe, and how, as time goes by, this is changing.
Building, launching and operating Euclid will cost a massive £480
million, with about £80 million coming from the UK.
The UK will be in charge of the telescope's digital camera, which
will be one of the largest cameras of its kind to head into space.
Euclid is set to launch in 2019.
fig A Artist's impression of the Euclid satellite telescope in space.
The super expensive machine is being built by the European Space
Agency and the UK will play a big part in creating it.
It will be called Euclid and investigate dark matter and dark
energy.
An online article by CBBC's Newsround programme, posted on 20 June 2012 at
http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsround/18524597
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1
6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
194
12.1
Questions
The mass of the Sun is 2.0 x 1030 kg. If we assume that it is entirely
composed of protons, how many protons is this? If the Sun fuses all
its protons over the course of its estimated nine billion year lifetime,
how many protons are undergoing nuclear fusion every second?
2
Draw a flow chart showing the life cycles of:
(a) a star which starts out with six times the mass of the Sun
(b) a star which starts out with twice the mass of the Sun.
3
Calculate the gravitational field strength at the surface of a black
hole, that has five times the mass of the Sun and a diameter of
10 cm. How does this compare to the Earth's gravitational field
strength?
(a) From memory, make a quick sketch of the Hertzsprung-Russell
diagram and mark on it the path taken by a star with the same
mass as our Sun as it develops through the various stages of its
life cycle.
(b) Mark on your sketch the life cycle path taken by a blue
supergiant if it starts out with a mass 8 times that of the Sun.
5 Why do the nuclear fusion processes within stars tend to produce
elements with a mass number which is a multiple of four, such as
carbon-12, oxygen-16 and silicon-20?
6
fig E The remains of supernova N63A Menagerie.
After a high-mass star has exploded as a supernova, the entire
star may be completely shattered. If there remains a central core
of stellar material, this will either be a neutron star (if the core
was up to three solar masses) or a black hole (if the core retained
more than three solar masses). Neither of these is easy to detect,
as they emit little or no light, and they are not plotted on the
Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. A neutron star consists almost
entirely of neutrons, packed as densely together as the nucleons
within the nucleus of an atom. They can hold three times the
mass of the Sun but are only about 10 km in diameter. Black holes
are even smaller and hold even more matter than neutron stars.
This means that their gravitational pull is immense, so strong that
even things travelling at the speed of light cannot escape.
You will see from fig F that a given star develops through its
life as various different types of star. If we observe it at each of
these points in its life, they would be plotted in different places on
the H-R diagram. Thus, we can plot the life cycle of a star as a
movement around the H-R diagram (fig F).
(a) Why can't the nuclear fusion in stars produce elements higher
in the periodic table than iron-56?
(b) How then do heavier elements than iron-56 exist, when the Big
Bang produced an initial Universe composed of only hydrogen
and helium?
red giant
Key definitions
A Hertzsprung-Russell diagram is a plot of stars, showing
luminosity (or absolute magnitude) on the y-axis, and temperature
(or spectral class) on the x-axis.
The main sequence is a rough diagonal line from top left to bottom
right of a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram which marks stars that are in
a generally stable phase of their existence.
A protostar is dust and gas clumping together under the force of
gravity, prior to the start of nuclear fusion in its core, which will go
on to become a star.
A neutron star is one of the possible conclusions to the life of a large
mass star; small and very dense, composed of neutrons.
A black hole is one of the possible conclusions to the life of a large
mass star; a region of space-time in which the gravity is so strong
that it prevents anything from escaping, including EM radiation.
A planetary nebula is the remnants of an explosion at the end of the
life cycle of a low-mass star; material which may eventually
agglomerate into new planets.
A black dwarf is the final stage of the life cycle of a small mass star,
when nuclear fusion has ceased and it has cooled so that it no longer
emits visible light.
A supernova is the explosion of a large mass star at the end of its
lifetime, when it becomes extremely unstable.
ANNANANAMAN
Luminosity compared to the Sun, L/Lsn
protostar
WWW.
main sequence
(stable yellow
dwarf)
nebula
white dwarf
40000
20000
5000
2500
10000
Temperature, T/K
fig F The Sun's life cycle will move it around the H-R diagram.
180
12.1
Astronomers have not yet discovered what the dark matter could be. Most stars will have a planetary
system, but the mass of all these planets is not nearly enough to hold a galaxy together. Similarly,
black holes or interstellar gases are good candidates for dark matter, but these (and other similar
suggestions) are also not observed in sufficient quantities. We can account for some dark matter with
straightforward things such as these, but scientists are convinced that the majority of dark matter is
of another as yet unknown form.
Gravitational lensing
Einstein's theory of gravity explains that large masses will deform space-time - the fabric of the
Universe - so that it accelerates things. This is quite different from Newton's explanation of gravity as
a force. The curving of space-time predicts that the direction of travel of light will be affected. Very
large masses, such as galaxies or black holes, will cause a bending of light rather like when it passes
through a lens. This effect has been widely observed in photographs of deep space (fig D).
fig D Gravitational lensing shows the extended arc beneath the Abell 383 galaxy cluster. Such arcs are images of much
more distant galaxies where the light has been bent around the Abell 383 galaxy cluster by its enormous mass.
fig E Using gravitational lensing, astronomers have further verified the existence of dark matter, to the extent that they
have made incredibly detailed maps of its locations in space. This picture was generated from images taken by
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope.
192
Space
12.1
flat Universe
closed Universe
open
Alat
Size
closed
open Universe
Time
fig A Our Universe could expand forever, keep slowing down but never reaching a standstill, or slow down to a standstill
and start collapsing.
Dark matter
To determine the fate of the Universe, scientists have been trying to work out its density. However, they
have hit upon some big problems. In the 1960s and 1970s, American astronomer Vera Rubin made
observations of many galaxies and discovered a very unexpected result. The stars in the galaxies tend
to rotate at similar speeds, whatever their distance from the galactic centre. This is wholly unlike the
Solar System, in which the further planets from the Sun orbit much more slowly than those close in.
Galaxies emit a certain amount of light. We can measure this by measuring their apparent brightness
and accounting for the inverse square decrease in this caused by the distance to the galaxy. From
the actual luminosity of a galaxy, we can estimate the mass of all its stars. Galaxies rotate and this
means that all the stars they contain must be experiencing a centripetal force towards the centre of
the galaxy's rotation. When astronomers measure the rotational speed of the stars in the galaxies,
they find that the mass suggested by the luminosity calculations is not nearly enough to create the
centripetal force needed to keep the galaxy spinning (fig C). In fact, the mass of the stars is generally
only about 10% of that needed. This suggests that galaxies must contain a lot of mass that does not
emit light. This has been dubbed dark matter.
fig B Vera Rubin's discovery of
unexpected orbital speeds for
stars in the Andromeda galaxy
highlighted profound problems
in the theories about the
structure of the Universe.
fig C The mass of stars lighting up a galaxy is not nearly enough to provide a gravitational centripetal force strong
enough to hold the stars in place against their rotational velocity.
ce against their rot enough to provide
191
Space
12.1
collapse. It is this constant battle between the outward pressure
and gravity that drives the evolution of a star throughout
its lifetime. The initial mass of the star is a critical factor in
determining how the battle wages, and thus which of the possible
life cycles a star will follow (fig D).
The multiple possible life cycles for stars are usually grouped
together into just two paths in which the outcomes are similar.
These are the life cycle for low-mass stars (such as our Sun) and
the life cycle for massive stars, which have at least four times the
mass of our Sun.
Low-mass stars
Once it has accreted about the mass of our Sun, a low-mass star
will start to undergo nuclear fusion of hydrogen, converting this
into helium. This is a stable stage of life in which radiation pressure
and gravity are in equilibrium. The star will remain in this state for
billions of years. Eventually, it will run low on hydrogen fuel, but
will have produced so much energy that it will expand slightly. This
expansion causes the temperature to fall and the star becomes a
red giant. Our Sun is expected to undergo this change in another
4-5 billion years, when it will expand beyond the orbit of Venus.
Once most of the hydrogen fuel is used, the star will start fusing
helium nuclei. This complex process can cause an explosion
which throws some material from the star out into space, forming
a planetary nebula. As the fuel to produce energy to support the
star runs out, the outward pressure from fusion drops and gravity
takes hold, causing the star to contract to a much smaller size. This
heats up the star significantly and it becomes a white dwarf. As time
continues, the star will slowly run out of energy and die, passing
through the red dwarf stage to become a black dwarf. Note that
the black dwarf stage is theoretical, as it takes a white dwarf longer
than the current age of the Universe to cool this much, so there has
not yet been time for any to develop
Massive stars
If a protostar has more than four times the mass of our Sun,
the star begins life as a blue supergiant. As with low-mass stars,
nuclear fusion begins and the star enters a stable stage of life in
which heat pressure and gravity are in equilibrium. However, the
fusion processes happen at much higher temperatures than in
lower mass stars. The core of our Sun may be at 15 million kelvin,
whereas a large star could have a core temperature of 40 million
kelvin. This means that it burns very quickly, and the conditions
make it possible for further fusion of some of the larger nuclei it
produces to occur. The fusion of helium can produce a variety of
the larger elements, which have mass numbers which are multiples
of 4 (helium has four nucleons), such as carbon, oxygen and
silicon. There will then be stages of carbon and oxygen burning.
A high-mass star is likely to be on the main sequence for only
up to a billion years. When the material of such a star has been
fused to the point where it is mostly iron, it can no longer undergo
nuclear fusion and it stops producing energy. This happens even
more abruptly than in a low-mass star, and with the enormous
gravitational forces produced by the large mass, it undergoes an
incredible collapse. This sudden increase in density produces a
sudden huge burst of energy, effectively bouncing the collapse
back out. This explosion is called a (Type II) supernova and is
the most immense burst of energy ever witnessed. It is so bright,
at about 10 billion times the luminosity of the Sun, that you can
see the change in the night sky with the naked eye.
Within a supernova explosion there is so much energy that
nuclear reactions occur that produce the elements above iron
in the periodic table. The natural occurrence of these elements
is evidence that supernovae must have occurred in the past, as
the binding energies of these heavy elements are such that they
cannot be created in other natural processes in the Universe.
Life cycle of a low-mass star
protostar
Sun-like star
red giant
planetary nebula
white dwarf
Life cycle of a massive star
black hole
protostar
blue supergiant
red supergiant
type II supernova
neutron star
fig D How initial mass affects stellar evolution.
179
Thinking Bigger
12.1
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this report.
vvvvvvvvu
1. The article is from the website that supports a children's news programme, Newsround.
a. Explain why it is written as a series of single sentence paragraphs.
b. Explain why the article is only 218 words long.
c. Comment on the size and location of the picture accompanying the article.
2. Describe the level of science presented in this article, and explain how scientific
concepts are presented for the intended audience.
Consider that the
FAQ section on the
Newsround website
states that their
target audience is
6 to 12 year olds.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
Vrouw
Consider the Doppler
effect at points on
opposite sides of a
rotating galaxy.
3. What statement in the article suggests that the Euclid will use a telescope that could have
glass lenses?
4. a. Explain how astronomers can detect that a galaxy is rotating.
b. Explain how unexpectedly fast rotation of galaxies can be explained if there is
undetected dark matter mass in the galaxy.
5. Explain the basic difference between dark matter and dark energy.
6. The consortium that is working together to make the Euclid mission happen includes
over 120 laboratories from institutions in 15 countries. What information in the
Newsround article highlights the need for such a large number of contributors?
00000
Activity
Write a script for a comparable article for the BBC's main radio news on the World Service. You should
include the main basic structure as the Newsround article, but should develop the depth of the scientific
reporting for an adult public audience. This task may require some further research about the Euclid
mission.
Consider that the BBC
World Service is
broadcast globally and
reaches nearly 200 million
listeners each week.
Further consider that only
5% of the population of
Earth have English as their
first language, although
your report should be
written in English.
8.2
8.3
9.1
10.1
11.1 YOU ARE 12.1
YOU ARE
HERE
13.1
195
Space
12.1
So, the recession velocity of a galaxy is directly proportional to
the distance to it. The constant of proportionality, the Hubble
constant, can be found from the gradient of the graph in fig D.
This has had many values over the years, which demonstrates
the immense difficulties involved in accurately determining
astronomical distances. Since the launch of the ESA Planck
Surveyor, the uncertainty in measurements and hence the
uncertainty in the Hubble constant has reduced significantly, and it
is hoped that data from the Gaia survey will improve it even more.
The current value is considered accurate to within 1% and is
H = 70.9 km s-1 Mpc-1, although the most recent data give
a slightly lower value (see fig A in Section 12.1.5). With an
accurate value for Ho, astronomers can now also use Hubble's law
to determine distances to newly observed objects, such as that
in fig C.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Note that in this calculation you should use the same units for the
distance and for the length component of the units for recession
velocity. Usually, though, the Hubble constant is quoted in units
of km s-1 Mpct.
Ho = 70.9 km - Mpc-1 = 70900 m s-1 Mpc-!
1 pc = 3.09 x 1016 m
1 Mpc = 3.09 x 1022m
70900
Ho = 3.09 x 1022
= 2.29 X 10-18ms-m-!
Ho = 2.29 X 10-185-1
To =H
10 = 2.29 10-18
A supernova appears in the night sky, and astronomers find that it
has a red shift of z = 0.45. How far away is the supernova?
To = 4.36 x 10175
This value for To gives the age of the Universe as 13.8 billion
years.
Questions
V = ZXC
= 0.45 x 3 x 108
= 1.35 x 108ms-1
= 1.35 x 105 kms
According to Hubble's law.
v=Hgd
Edwin Hubble discovered that the light from other galaxies is
Doppler shifted towards the red end of the light spectrum. What
does this tell us about the movement of galaxies? Why did this lead
Hubble to conclude that the Universe is expanding?
H
(a) Why do spectators at a motor race hear the characteristic
"Neeeoooww' sound as each car passes?
(b) Why do the drivers hear a sound of constant pitch?
1.35 x 105
70.9
d = 1900 MPC
Note that the speed was found in kms), as we have the Hubble
constant in kms-i Mpc-l
The galaxy NGC 7320C has a red shift value of z = 0.02.
(a) At what wavelength would you expect to find the hydrogen
alpha line in the spectrum of light from NGC 7320C?
(b) Use the best modern value for Hubble's constant to calculate
the distance to NGC 7320C in megaparsecs.
WP
The value for the Hubble constant has varied over the years,
from 50 kms Mpc' to 100 kms Mpc', as different star
data were used to draw the graph. Calculate the range of
ages of the Universe that this represents.
How old is the Universe?
As all distant objects show a red shift, they are all moving away
from us. This implies that the Universe as a whole is expanding.
If we imagine time running backwards from the present, then the
known Universe would contract back to a point where everything is
in the same place. This would be the time of the Big Bang, when
everything first exploded outwards from that single point. Thus, if we
can find the Hubble constant, it will tell us how quickly the Universe
is expanding. From this we can work out when it all started.
For an object to travel a distance do from the beginning of time, at
a speed of v the time taken, To, can be calculated from the basic
equation for speed:
d - distance
Key definitions
Red shift is the shift in wavelength of a star's spectrum, caused by
increasing separation between the star and Earth.
The Doppler effect occurs when an observer receiving waves
emitted from a moving body observes that the wavelength of the
waves has been altered, to a new wavelength, as a consequence of
the relative motion.
Hubble's law is that the recession velocity of a galaxy is directly
proportional to the distance to it.
Hubble constant is the constant of proportionality in Hubble's law.
The Big Bang is the theory that the Universe expanded outwards,
from a single point to the currently observed situation.
speed
time
Vo = TO
If we consider the gradient of the Hubble graph, H, =
•
To = 7
189
12.1
5
The fate of the Universe
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
discuss the controversy over the age and ultimate fate of the Universe associated with the value
of the Hubble constant and the possible existence of dark matter
The Hubble constant
In Section 12.1.4 we hinted at the variation in values of the Hubble constant depending on the
observational methods used to find it. This is a very significant and important problem, as it can
give a huge variation in possible ages for our Universe. Over the years, the Universe's age based
on Hubble's law calculations has given answers ranging from 10 billion to 20 billion years. Table A
shows a 2014 summary of recent experimental conclusions that tend to favour a slightly lower value
for H, than the currently accepted 70.9 kms-Mpc-1. Further observations are needed to confirm
these newer results before scientists will agree to change H. The result of all of this is that we are
left in the position that the age of our Universe is not a known fixed answer, but keeps changing as
experimental methods improve.
Data set
Ho
Combined results
C D E
A
B
F
G
kms-impc
70.0 - 2.2
69.4 + 2.2
67.3 + 1.2
WMAP9/2013a
WMAP9/2014b
Planck+WMAPPol/2013
ACT+SPT/20120
ACT+SPT/20130
ACT+SPT/20140
BAO/2012
BAO/2013
BAO/2014
Ho Reiss et al. (2011)
Ho, Reiss (2014)
Combined Ho (kms-'Mpc)
Combined o (kms-'Mpc)
73.8 + 2.4
73.0 + 2.4
V
.
67.8 68.3 68.8 69.3 69.2 69.3 69.6
0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7
table A The values of Ho derived from different measurement techniques and data sets. From The 1%
concordance Hubble constant, by Bennett, Larson, Weiland and Hinshaw. Johns Hopkins University,
citationsubmitted to Astrophysical Journal, June 2014.
WP
Future Universe?
The Universe is expanding. Will this change in the future? The answer to this question depends
critically on the mass of the Universe, and more specifically on the density of matter. Gravity is
the force that could slow the expansion down to a stop, and possibly even then start to cause the
Universe to contract back inwards (fig A). This might eventually end in a Big Crunch. The force
of gravity between particles decreases with the square of the distance. Thus, if the matter in the
Universe is only sparse, then the gravitational forces between particles, stars and galaxies will be
generally weak The Universe will continue expanding forever. However, if the matter in the Universe
has more than a critical density then the gravitational forces will succeed in causing the Big Crunch.
190
12.1 Exam-style questions
(Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
*5 Parallax measurements are used to determine the distance
to nearby stars, but this method is unsuitable for more distant
objects.
Describe how parallax measurements are used to determine
the distance to nearby stars and explain how the use of a
standard candle enables the distance to more remote objects
to be determined.
[Total: 6]
1 What is the peak wavelength of electromagnetic radiation
emitted by a star which has a surface temperature of 12 000 K?
A 2.42 x 10-7m
B0.242 m
C 34.8 m
D 4.13 X 106m
[1]
[Total: 1]
6
The position of our Sun, S is shown on the Hertzsprung-
Russell (H-R) diagram below.
.
XSX-
*
10000-
***
*
2 The intensity of the energy from the Sun arriving at the Earth is
1370 W m-2. The diameter of the Earth's orbit is 3.0 x 1011 m.
What is the luminosity of the Sun?
A 4.85 x 10-21 W
B 2.58 x 1015 W
C 3.87 x 1026 W
D 1.55 X 1027 W
[Total: 1]
Luminosity/L
+
0.01 -
TE
[1]
3 In the laboratory, sodium absorbs light with a wavelength of
5.893 x 10-7m. The light from a star shows the same sodium
absorption line at a wavelength of 5.895 x 10-7m.
A The star is approaching the Earth at a speed of 0.06ms!
B The star is receding from the Earth at a speed of 0.06 ms!
C The star is approaching the Earth at a speed of 100 km s.
D The star is receding from the Earth at a speed of 100 km 5-1
0.0001 +
24000 12000' 6000 ' 3000
T/K
(a) (i) Identify the three main regions of the H-R diagram. [3]
(ii) Add lines to a copy of the diagram to show the
evolutionary path of our Sun from the time when it
comes to the end of its hydrogen-burning phase. [2]
(b) Most stars are too far away from the Earth for astronomers
to observe them as anything more than a point source of
radiation.
Explain how astronomers calculate the sizes of these stars,
using information from the H-R diagram.
[Total: 8]
[Total: 1]
[3]
4 The planet Mars has a mean distance from the Sun of
2.3 x 1011m compared with the Earth's mean distance from
the Sun of 1.5 x 1011 m.
Sun's radiation flux at distance of Mars
(a) Calculate the ratio
Sun's radiation flux at distance of Earth
[2]
(b) With reference to your answer in (a), comment on the
suggestion that Mars could be capable of supporting life. [2]
[Total: 4]
196
Exam-style questions
12.1
7 The graph shows how the velocity varies with distance for a
number of distant galaxies. All the galaxies are receding from
Earth, and there appears to be a linear relationship between the
velocity of recession and the distance to the galaxy.
120004
10000
8000
Velocity, V/kms !
6000 -
4000 -
2000-
.
*
6
8 A student carries out an experiment on the Stefan-Boltzmann
law.
L = oT4A
She uses the filament of a light bulb as a model for a black
body radiator.
(a) She obtains the following results.
L = 23.5 W + 2% T= 2400K + 4%
The student estimates the surface area of the filament A to
be 2.0 x 10-5m2 + 5%.
(i) Use her results to calculate an experimental value for
the Stefan-Boltzmann constant o.
[1]
(ii) Calculate the percentage uncertainty in the
experimental value of o.
(iii) Calculate the percentage difference between the
experimental value of o and the accepted value,
o = 5.67 x 10-6 W m-2 K-4
[1]
(iv) Use these percentages to comment on the reliability
of the experimental value for o.
(b) The Stefan-Boltzmann law can be written as
In L = 4ln 7+ In A
The student obtains a range of values for L and Tand plots
a graph of In L against In T.
(i) Explain clearly how she could use this graph to obtain
a value for o.
(ii) She realises that she cannot control the temperature of
the room.
Explain why this will have little effect on the result of
the experiment.
[1]
[Total: 8]
0
[1]
25
50
Distance, d/100km
(a) Use the graph to estimate an age for the Universe. [4]
*(b) Describe how astronomers would have determined the
velocity of each galaxy.
*(c) Scientists are uncertain about the ultimate fate of the
Universe. Explain why.
[3]
[Total: 12]
[5]
[2]
197
12.1
Starshine
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• define a black body radiator in astronomy
• interpret radiation curves for a black body radiator
use the equation L = oAT4 for the Stefan-Boltzmann law
use Wien's law equation / maxT = 2.90 x 10-mK
fig B Can you identify the brightest and dimmest stars in this star cluster,
NGC 290?
We define luminosity as the rate at which energy of all types is
radiated by an object in all directions. This depends upon both the
object's size and, more importantly, its temperature.
Stellar properties
Stars are at such enormous distances from the Earth that the
only information we have about them is the electromagnetic
radiation we receive from them (fig A). However, from this limited
information, we can measure various stellar properties. These
allow us to classify stars into various groups which have quite
enigmatic names, such as red giant, white dwarf and blue
supergiant. They are much too far away for us to send probes
to them, or even to send signals to them in the hope of detecting
reflections. However, scientists have managed to determine an
enormous amount of detailed information from even the faintest
glows in the night sky. Incredibly, the electromagnetic emissions
from stars can tell us their temperature, chemical composition,
speed of movement, approximate age, size and much more.
T= 6000K
T= 4500K
T = 3000K
Energy output
short (bluer) Wavelength long (redder)
fig C Black body radiation curves for different temperatures.
The electromagnetic radiation is given off across a very large
range of wavelengths. A perfect black body radiator will give off
energy across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, following a
distribution like those in fig C. This distribution is given by the
Stefan-Boltzmann law. This tells us that the output power from
a black body is proportional to its surface area and the fourth
power of its temperature in kelvin.
L = AT4
where the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, a = 5.67 x 10-Wm-K-4
For a sphere, this would become:
L = 46r2074
fig A Starlight is the only information we have about the stars.
Working on the assumption that a star acts like a black body
emitter, which is a very good approximation, this equation
describes the luminosity of a star.
The Stefan-Boltzmann law
How bright is a star? With the naked eye, we are only able to
distinguish six different levels of how bright stars appear to
us (fig B). This is insufficient for scientific use, as many stars
of differing brightness would appear identical to our eyes.
Astronomers therefore use a more precise measure to classify the
actual brightness of stars: their output power, which is known as
luminosity.
Learning tip
A black body radiator is a theoretical perfect emitter, which follows the
Stefan-Boltzmann energy output curve for its temperature, as illustrated
in fig C, and also follows Wien's law below. Here we are approximating
stars to perfect black bodies. Remember, black body radiation is a
thermodynamics idea that can be applied in other areas of physics.
174
12.1
fig C This image is a composite taken with Hubble's WFC 3 and ACS on 5 October and 29 November 2011. It shows
dwarf galaxy MACS0647-JD, which is the most distant object yet observed. It has a red shift of about z = 11.
Hubble's law
Astronomers quickly realised that red shift implied that galaxies surrounding us were travelling away
from us. In 1929 the American astronomer Edwin Hubble published his finding that the value of a
galaxy's red shift is proportional to its distance from us, that is, the further away a galaxy is the faster
it is moving. Hubble's paper had the same effect on the twentieth century view of the Universe as
Galileo's work on the solar system had some 300 years earlier. Instead of being static, the Universe was
expanding. The philosophical implications continue to tax the minds of scientists and religious scholars
(see Section 12.1.5)
Velocity of recession
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
i velocity = Hubble's constant X distance
-
-
-
-
-
-
Distance
fig D As virtually all galaxies show red shifts in their spectra, Hubble concluded that all the galaxies must be moving
apart from each other and the Universe is expanding.
Learning tip
Local motions deviating from the overall expansion can affect the red shift in a confusing way, which is the
main reason that the points in fig D show a significant scatter around the best-fit line. Most of the
movement causing red shift comes from the expansion of the Universe.
Considering the speeds of objects at cosmological distances, there is a simple relationship between them.
This is known as Hubble's law:
v=H.
188
Space
12.1
A receding star or galaxy emits light that appears to have a longer wavelength than expected. We
also experience this effect when, for example, we hear a car coming towards us and driving past at
a steady rate (fig A). As it approaches, the note of its engine rises to a maximum pitch, and then
falls as the car travels away. You could imagine the waves getting squashed closer together (shorter
wavelength) as the car drives towards you, and then stretched further apart (longer wavelength) as it
drives away.
laboratory spectrum
spectral lines
are shifted
towards the
red end of
the spectrum
spectrum from a distant galaxy
fig B Comparison of light from distant galaxies with light produced in (stationary) Earth-based experiments can allow
calculation of the galaxy's speed away from Earth.
The amount of red shift a galaxy exhibits, z, allows us to calculate how fast it is moving. This can be
done using measurements of either wavelength or frequency changes (fig B).
AN A v
WORKED EXAMPLE
In a laboratory sample, the hydrogen alpha spectral absorption line is at a wavelength of 656.285
nanometres. In the spectrum from a nearby star, this line is observed at a wavelength of 656.315 nm.
How fast is this star moving and in which direction?
The wavelength from the star is longer than it should be, so the star is moving away.
AX = 656.315 - 656.285 = 0.030 nm
V = cx41
= 3 x 108 x 0.030
656.285
= 13700 ms1
V = 13.7 km s-1
187
What have I studied before?
• Gravitational forces
Newton's laws of motion
Conservation of energy
• Temperature and blackbody radiation
Emission and absorption spectra
What will I study later?
The development of planets and star systems
(further study)
• The interactions between galaxies (further study)
The mapping of dark matter (further study)
Experimental research into dark matter (further
study)
The structure and operation of telescopes (further
study)
What will I study in this chapter?
• The life cycles of stars
. How to calculate the energy emitted by stars
Stellar classification
How to measure the distances to stars and
galaxies
Redshift and Hubble's law
The development of galaxies and the Universe as
a whole
Dark matter and dark energy
2
Space
12.1
Questions
1 Using the data shown in the worked example earlier in this section,
calculate how far away Alpha Centauri is in astronomical units?
It was possible to calculate the intrinsic luminosity of these stars,
as they were close enough to use trigonometric parallax to find
their distance. Leavitt had discovered the period-luminosity
relation. A longer time period for oscillation meant an intrinsically
brighter star. Astronomers then took this relationship and used
it to determine the luminosity of variable stars at much greater
distances. From the luminosity, the distance to these stars can
be determined using our expression for the radiant energy flux
observed on Earth. RR Lyrae variable stars allow us to measure
distances to about 760 000 parsecs. However, Leavitt particularly
studied Cepheid variable stars. There are two types of these, and
the more luminous Type I Cepheids give us the greatest distance
measurements using the standard candle technique, out to about
40 million parsecs.
2
The parallax angle to Barnard's Star is 0.545". How far away is
Barnard's Star in
(a) metres?
(b) light years?
(c) parsecs?
(d) astronomical units?
The luminosity of Rigel is 3.9 x 1031 W. At the Earth, Rigel's radiant
energy intensity is 5.42 x 10-8 W. How far away is the star?
3
Temperature-luminosity relationship
One of the simplest methods of determining the luminosity of
a star is simply to look at its spectrum. The peak wavelength
gives the temperature from Wien's law, and the width of spectral
lines can determine whether or not it is a main sequence star.
If it is, and you find its place on the main sequence of the H-R
diagram as shown in fig G, you can read the luminosity from the
v-axis. However, this is one of the least reliable standard candle
methodologies.
100007
J15 Mo
Jupiter's orbit is 5.2 AU from the Sun. If Jupiter is considered as a
black body with a temperature of 110 K, and radius 69 900 km,
calculate:
(a) the maximum radiant energy intensity at the surface of the
Earth due to Jupiter's electromagnetic emissions (hint: you will
first need to calculate the luminosity).
(b) the peak wavelength of Jupiter's energy output.
How does the energy we receive from Jupiter compare with what
we get from the Sun?
100
5 MO
IMO
Luminosity compared to the Sun, L/L.
Kev definitions
A light year is the distance that light can travel in one year, which is
about 1016
An astronomical unit (AU) is the radius of the Earth's orbit around
the Sun: 1 AU = 1.5 * 1011 m.
Trigonometric parallax is a method for measuring the distance to
relatively close stars. It works by comparing their measured angle in
the sky at six monthly intervals, and using these measurements to
calculate the distance using trigonometry.
A parallax angle is the difference in angular observation of a given
star, for use in the trigonometric parallax method of measuring the
distance to a star.
A parsec (pc) is the distance a star must be from the Sun in order for
the parallax angle Earth-star-Sun to be 1 arcsecond.
1 pc = 3.09 x 1016 m
Standard candles are stars with properties which mean their
luminosity can be determined from measurements other than
brightness.
0.2 M.X
0.0001
0.07
30000 10000 6000 3000
Surface temperature/K
0 B AF G KM
fig G The relationship between stellar size and temperature gives luminosity,
which in turn can give distance,
185
LE
TOPIC 12
Space
CHAPTER
12.1
Space
Introduction
Throughout history, mankind has been entranced by the stars in the night sky. From the ancient constellation stories all
WP the way through to Van Gogh's 1889 painting The Starry Night, and on nowadays to glorious photographs, the stars at
night have had a mystical hold over people.
Scientists have also fallen under this spell, but have applied the usual techniques of measurement and evidence-seeking to the
studies of astronomy and astrophysics. It is truly remarkable how much information we have gained about the stars, galaxies
and the Universe as a whole, from nothing more than the light that lands on us from these distant celestial bodies. This has
even taken us beyond the study of the things we can see, to infer the existence of a number of things we cannot. Most of the
Universe is dark energy and dark matter, and although we cannot detect either of these, starlight can tell us they are there and
affecting everything in the Universe.
In this chapter, we will look at how stars emit energy as electromagnetic radiation of various wavelengths, and what we can
deduce from the measurements of this radiation when it arrives at the Earth. We will see how to determine the distance to a
star, how hot it is, what type of star it is, what it is made of, and much more besides.
All the maths you need
• Use of angles in 2D and 3D structures (e.g. using trigonometric parallax)
Use of small angle approximations (e.g. in trigonometric parallax)
• Solving algebraic equations (e.g. finding the temperature of a star from its peak wavelength)
• Changing the subject of a non-linear equation (e.g. finding the temperature of a star from its luminosity)
Sketching and interpreting relationships shown graphically (e.g. comparing the Stefan-Boltzmann curves for stars of different
temperatures)
12.1
The age of the Universe
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. define the Doppler effect and explain its application to the light from other stars and galaxies
use the equation for red shift of light, z =
describe Hubble's law and the equation v = Hod for objects at cosmological distances
-
f
The Doppler effect
When astronomers first began to look at the spectra of stars in other galaxies during the 1920s, they
noticed that the spectra looked very similar to the spectra from stars in our own galaxy but that all
the features present were shifted by the same relative amount towards the red end of the spectrum.
This phenomenon became known as the red shift. This shift is due to the relative motion of other
galaxies with respect to ours, in an effect called the Doppler effect: an observer receiving waves
emitted from a moving body observes that the wavelength of the waves has been altered to a new
wavelength
same frequency
in all directions
stationary car
Behind the car the
wavefronts are
stretched out, since
the car is travelling
in the opposite
direction to the
waves.
Ahead of the car
the wavefronts
are compressed,
since the car is
travelling in the
same direction
as the waves.
moving car
fig A The Doppler effect causes a change in frequency and wavelength if there is relative motion between the wave
source and the observer.
186
12.1
fig A You can observe the principle behind parallax measurements using your fingers to represent near and distant stars.
Earth 2
background
stars
Sun
OOOO
star
Earth 1
fig B Trigonometric parallax measurements.
Using observations of the star to be measured against a background of much more distant stars, we
can measure the angle between the star and the Earth in these two different positions in space, six
months apart. As we know the size of the Earth's orbit, geometry allows calculation of the distance
to the star
Sun
star
Earth 1
fig C The geometry of trigonometric parallax.
182
12.1
Stellar classification
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
sketch and interpret a simple Hertzsprung-Russell diagram relating stellar luminosity to surface
temperature
relate the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram to the life cycle of stars
Star classes
Astronomers have classified stars into groups according to their temperature. This is a useful
property to use since stars with similar temperatures tend to share many other features. As we saw
from Wien's law (see fig D in Section 12.1.1) the temperature determines the spectral output of the
star, but it can also suggest chemical composition and age.
M/Msun
R/Rsun
L/Lsun
Spectral Effective
Colour
Main
class temperature/K
sequence
lifespan
28 000-50 000 blue 20-60 9-15 90000-800 000 1-10 Myr
10 000-28000 blue-white 3-18 3.0-8.4 95-52000 11-400 Myr
7500-10000 white 2.0-3.0 1.7-2.7 8-55 400 Myr-3 Gyr
6000-7500 white-yellow 1.1-1.6 1.2-16 2.0-6.5
3-7 Gyr
4900-6000 yellow 0.85-1.1 0.85-1.1 0.66-1.5 7-15 Gyr
3500-4900 orange 0.65-0.85 0.65-0.85 0.10-0.42
17 Gyr
M
2000-3500 red 0.08-0.05 0.17-0.63 0.001-0.08 5 6 Gyr
table A Spectral class summary.
The spectral star classes are labelled by letters (table A). The usual mnemonic for remembering the
letters, in order from hottest to coolest, is:
Oh Be A Fine Girl (or Guy), Kiss Me!
You will notice a number of trends in the data in table A. The hotter stars tend to have more mass
and are more luminous. The larger gravitational pressure at the centre of a massive star makes
the nuclear fusion reactions within the star run very fast, producing a lot of energy and using
the hydrogen fuel in the star at an incredible rate. In addition, more massive stars are also larger.
Therefore, with large size and high temperatures, the hotter stars are very luminous, giving off a great
deal of energy. At the same distance away from us, these will then appear very bright in the night sky
compared with a smaller, cooler star.
Table A also shows the change in colour that goes along with changing stellar class. The overall
impression of the O class spectrum is a bluish colour, whereas for the M class spectrum there is a
pronounced red colour showing. These changes are a direct result of the variation in output curve we
saw associated with Wien's law. Fig B highlights how this comes about.
176
Space
12.1
WORKED EXAMPLE
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the luminosity of the Sun, given that it has a radius of
7.0 x 108m and its surface temperature is 5800 K?
Luminosity of the Sun, L:
L = QATA
= 04772T4
= 5.67 x 10-8 x 47 (7.010)2 58004
= 3.95 x 1025 W
Looking at the spectrum of light from Betelgeuse, in the
constellation of Orion, its peak wavelength is at 9.35 x 10-7m.
What is the surface temperature of Betelgeuse?
Amax T = 2.898 x 10-
2.898 x 10-3
max
2.898 x 10-3
9.35 x 10-7
T= 3100K
What would be the surface temperature of a star of radius
14.0 x 108m with the same luminosity as the Sun?
Astar = 472
= 477 (14.0 x 10992
= 2.46 x 1019 m2
Questions
Tstar loa
| What is the luminosity of the star Sirius, which has a surface
temperature of 12 000 K and a diameter of 2 220 000 km?
2
4 3 .95 x 1026
(5.67 x 10-8 x 2.46 x 1015)
= 4100K
So a bigger star can be at a lower temperature and yet have the
same luminosity, i.e. it looks as bright.
(a) The Sun's surface temperature has been measured as being
5800 K. Calculate the peak wavelength of the solar spectrum.
(b) The peak wavelength from the Sun is in fact measured on Earth
as being 470 nm. Why is the measured value different from your
calculated value from part (a)?
3
Calculate the peak wavelength output we would expect of Bellatrix
if its surface temperature is 21 500K.
4
From fig E, calculate the temperatures of Canopus and Rigel.
Wien's law
To calculate luminosity, we needed to know the temperature of the
star. There are various methods for determining the temperatures
of stars, but we will focus on one that uses the wavelengths of light
given off by a star. When we examine the range of wavelengths
emitted by a star, known as its spectrum, we find that some
wavelengths are given off with more intensity than others.
0.52
Rigel
Canopus
the Sun
Luminosity
Intensity/W m nm-1
160 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Wavelength/x 10m
fig E Spectral emission curves for three stars.
300 400
500
600 700 800
Wavelength/nm
900 1000 1100
fig D The spectrum of light emitted by the Sun.
We saw from the Stefan-Boltzmann law that as the temperature
of a black body increases, it emits more energy. Fig C shows how
the amount of energy emitted at different wavelengths changes
with temperature. At higher temperatures the curve has a more
pronounced peak, and the wavelength of the peak output gets
shorter as the temperature rises. The relationship between the peak
output wavelength and temperature is described by Wien's law:
Armax T = 2.898 x 10-3 mK
The number 2.898 x 10-3 m K is known as Wien's constant.
Key definitions
A red giant is a large star, somewhat cooler than our Sun, e.g. 3000K
A white dwarf is a small, hot star, perhaps 10000 K.
A blue supergiant is a very large, very hot star, perhaps 25 000 K.
Luminosity is the rate at which energy of all types is radiated by an
object in all directions.
Stefan-Boltzmann law is that the power output from a black body is
proportional to its surface area and the fourth power of its
temperature in kelvin, L = CAT
Wien's law is that the relationship between the peak output
wavelength and temperature for a black body radiator is given by
the equation: Amax T = 2.898 x 10-?m K.
175
12.1
3
Distances to the stars
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
• determine astronomical distances using trigonometric parallax
use the equation for the intensity of a star, I = =
47d2
measure astronomical distances using standard candles
Big distance units
Astronomical distances are very large. Our nearest neighbour is the Moon, and even that is nearly
400 000 000 m away. The Sun is 150 000 000 000 m away, and the distance to the orbit of Neptune
is 4500 000 000 000 m. Measuring across space generates very large values. Using standard form
notation helps with this, but astronomers have defined a number of alternative distance units to cut
down the magnitudes of the numbers involved.
You have probably already heard of the light year. This is the distance that light can travel in one
year, which is about 1016 m. We also use the astronomical unit (AU), which is the radius of the
Earth's orbit around the Sun: 1 AU = 1.5 x 1011 m.
Much of our understanding of the structure and formation of galaxies depends on being able to
measure the distances to stars accurately. Astronomers have developed a number of techniques for
doing this, but all have their limitations. These limitations can be overcome, or at least minimised, by
comparing the results from the different techniques on the same star, and refining the techniques to
improve accuracy.
Learning tin
Some of the techniques explained in this section are used on individual stars, and some are used on large
groups of stars, such as galaxies or star clusters.
Trigonometric parallax
To measure the distance to relatively close stars, astronomers use a method which is commonly used
in surveying, known as trigonometric parallax. As the Earth moves around the Sun, a relatively
close star will appear to move across the background of more distant stars. This optical illusion is
used to determine the distance of the star. The star itself does not move significantly during the
course of the observations. To determine the trigonometric parallax you measure the angle to a star,
and observe how that changes as the position of the Earth changes. We know that in six months the
Earth will be exactly on the opposite side of its orbit, and therefore will be two astronomical units
from its location today.
Using observations of the star to be measured against a background of much more distant stars, we
can measure the angle between the star and the Earth in these two different positions in space, six
months apart. As we know the size of the Earth's orbit, geometry allows calculation of the distance
to the star
181
Space
12.1
fig A Light spectra from typical stars in each star class. Note the white lines, which highlight the position of absorption
lines (actually black in the original photos). These give us information about the chemical composition of the stars,
and the Doppler shift which tells us their velocity.
Looking at fig B, if we combine together equal intensity parts of the colours of the visible spectrum,
this will produce white light. The extra emissions above this white basic emission - the peak of the
curve on the graph - will show the colour the star appears. Also, given the pattern of decreasing size
with luminosity we have seen above, it is logical to find that blue supergiants are generally O class
stars, whereas red dwarf stars are usually in the M class.
15 000K star
the Sun (5800K)
3000K star
light
Intensity/relative
visible
310 K human
102
10
10"
Wavelength/nm
fig B The peak of a star's Wien's law curve shows us what colour it will appear.
177
Space
12.1
By taking the picture of fig B and cutting it in half, we get a right-angled triangle formed as shown in
fig C, with the parallax angle, 0.
tan 8 =
d=-
tand
At small angles, as we are usually using in astronomy, tan 0
same units used to measure r, so we also have:
0. The distance, d, will come out in the
Learning tip
When making measurements
for the trigonometric parallax
of stars, astronomers often
need to be able to measure
very small differences in the
angles. Remember that each
degree can be split into 60
minutes, and each minute of
arc (an arc is a part of a circle)
can be split into 60 seconds.
1 degree = 60 minutes
= 3600 seconds
1° = 60' = 3600"
The parsec
A parsec (pc) is a measure of distance. It is an abbreviation of "parallax second'. It is the distance a
star must be from the Sun in order for the angle Earth-star-Sun to be 1 arcsecond.
1.5 x 1011
1 parsec =
tan (1/3600)
= 3.09 x 1016 m
1 light year = 3 x 108 x 365 x 24 x 60 x 60
= 9.46 x 1015 m
1 parsec = 3.27 light years
The triangle geometry also means that if we have the angle measurement in arcseconds, 0, the
distance, d, to the star, measured in parsecs, is easily obtainable from:
WORKED EXAMPLE
Astronomers measuring the parallax angle to Alpha Centauri found that the angle measured after a
six-month period was 1.52 seconds of arc different from that measured at first. How far is Alpha
Centauri from Earth?
20 = 1.52" r = 1.5 x 1011 m
0 = 1.52 - 0.76"
= 0.76X 3600
= 2.11 x 10-40
tand
__ 1.5 x 1011
tan (2.11 x 10-4)
1.5 x 1011
3.68 x 10-6
d = 4.07 x 1016 m
Alternatively, straight to parsecs
dal 1
0= 70.76
d = 1.32 pc
The accuracy of trigonometric parallax is dependent on the accuracy of the angle measurement. With
atmospheric interference for Earth-based telescopes, this was for many years limited to stellar distances
of about 100 light years. The European Space Agency's Gaia mission is an orbiting telescope, which has
an accuracy in the angle measurement of 24 microarcseconds. This corresponds to allowing accurate
distance measurement to stars as far away as 135000 light years. Section 12.1.4 also highlights how
important it is to know stellar distances accurately.
183
12.1
Standard candles
WORKED EXAMPLE
The Sun has a luminosity of L = 3.8 x 1025 W. What is the radiant
energy intensity from the Sun at the surface of the Earth?
d = 1.5 x 1011 m
,
L
4d
3.8 x 1026
47 (1.5 x 10'12
1 = 1300 Wm2
Some stars, including some variable stars and supernovae, have
properties which mean their luminosity can be determined quite
separately from other measurements. These are known as standard
candles. If we have a figure for the luminosity, and measure the
energy intensity (brightness) of the star reaching the Earth, we can
then calculate how far away it is by comparing it with a standard
candle with the same luminosity.
WORKED EXAMPLE
fig D At increasing distance, a light source will look dimmer.
We saw previously that the brightness of a star was linked to its
size and its temperature. However, the Stefan-Boltzmann law
only deals with the power output of the star at its surface. The
luminosity of a star is its overall power output over its entire
surface. How bright it looks to us, or how much energy we receive
from it, depends upon how far away the star is (fig D). It follows
that if we knew the power output of a star, then how bright it
appears to us on Earth would give away its distance.
The luminosity of Betelgeuse is 5.4 x 1030 W. Its radiant energy
intensity at the Earth is 1.1 x 10-8 Wm-2. How far away is
Betelgeuse?
400
DEL
d471
d=1471
light source
1 square
5.4 x 1030
147 (1.1 x 10-)
d=6.2 x 1018 m
d = 660 ly
d = 200 pc
or:
or:
4 squares
9 squares
fig E The inverse square law, showing energy spread over greater and greater
areas with increasing distance from a star.
In Book 1, Section 5.4.4 we saw that measurements of energy
intensity are calculated as power per unit area. The general
equation we had for intensity was I = The inverse square law
means that the energy emitted by a star will spread out in all
directions over the surface of an ever-increasing sphere (fig E).
As the surface area of a sphere is 47, this gives us an equation
for the radiant energy intensity at a certain distance, d, from a star
Variable stars
Over a period of years at the beginning of the twentieth century,
Henrietta Leavitt, working at the Harvard College Observatory,
catalogued a huge number of stars in the nearby Magellanic
Clouds. She monitored them over time and found that, for some
stars, their brightness changed, varying in a repeating cycle. The
time period of this oscillation in brightness was constant and,
importantly, was in direct proportion to the luminosity of each star
(fig F).
1.5 -
Brightness
1=
49d2
where L is the luminosity in watts.
0.75
period
00+TTT
2 3 4 5
Time/days
6
7
8
fig F The brightness variation typical of RR Lyrae variable stars. These are stars
which have left the main sequence, but have not yet exhausted all of their
nuclear fuels. They alternately expand and contract causing their light to
vary repeatedly.
184
_
12.1
2
The Hertzsprung-Russell diagram
If you were to plot a graph of luminosity against star temperature to confirm the trend of table A,
you would find that there is a general correlation. However, the more data you add, the more complex
the picture becomes. We must also remember that the temperature measurement assumes the star
behaves as a black body, and the luminosity is similarly often not as accurate as we would like. In
general, luminosity has to be determined from a calculation that includes the distance to the star,
and measuring the distances to stars is by no means an exact science (see Section 12.1.3 for more
details). Such a plot can give us some very useful insights, but is not a graph in the true sense. It is
known as a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram (fig C).
10" 1
supergiants
104 +
main sequence
giants
10-
Luminosity compared to the Sun, L/Lan
white dwarfs
10-6
I
20 000
10000
5000
2500
Temperature, T/K
fig C A Hertzsprung-Russell diagram.
Most stars we observe fall on a diagonal line across the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, which is
called the main sequence. These are stable stars which will exist in this state for the majority of
their lifetime. Their correlation represents the connection between brightness and high temperature,
Note that the plot is always drawn with hotter temperatures on the left-hand side.
There are also other stages in a star's evolution, which appear in other places on the diagram, but
these are much shorter than its stable period. Thus there are far fewer stars in those parts of the
H-R diagram. For example, as blue supergiants burn out in just a few million years, most of these
have already done so, and we do not see many, the top left area of the H-R diagram is lightly
populated
Stellar evolution
The majority of ordinary matter in the Universe is hydrogen (75%) or helium (24%), and it is
from these elements that stars are initially formed. From an accreting collection of these gases,
called a protostar, the life cycle of a star follows a number of stages, with the star ending its life
as a white dwarf, neutron star or black hole. As the star undergoes nuclear fusion, the binding
energy differences of the nuclei before and after fusion mean that the process releases energy, often
as electromagnetic radiation, to heat the star. The pressure from the vibration of its particles, and
the electromagnetic radiation trying to escape, hold up the structure of the star against gravitational
178
