Heat and temperature
9.1
WORKED EXAMPLE
-
-m
What is the pressure of 3 moles of helium contained in a child's
balloon, if the molecules have an rms speed of 1350ms), and the
radius of the balloon is 20 cm?
(mass of one helium atom, m = 6.65 x 10-27 kg)
PV = Nm<ca>
pNm<c<>/V
V = Tr3 = 3.35 x 10-2m
N = nNa= 3 * 6.02 x 103 = 1.806 x 1024 molecules
<c<> = 13502 = 1822 500 m25-2
1.806 x 1024 x 6.65 x 10-27 x 1822 500
3 (3.35 x 10-2)
p = 218 000 Pa
Compare this example with the worked examples in Sections 9.1.2
and 9.1.4.
2.0 kg of carbon dioxide is stored in a fire extinguisher at a pressure
of 8.6 MPa. The extinguisher is a cylinder of height 490 mm and
diameter 180 mm. What is the rms speed of the carbon dioxide
molecules?
PV = Nm<c2
3pV
Nm
V= r2h = 7 * (90 x 10-) x 490 x 10-3 = 0.0125 m3
Nm is the total mass of molecules present, 2.0kg.
3pv
Average molecular kinetic energy
The ideal gas equation from Section 9.1.4 is:
PV = NKT
and from above:
PV = 3 Nm<c>
Putting these together:
Nm<c2> = NKT
m<> = KT
Multiply both sides by :
m<c>> = KT
. im<c»> = KT
We saw the above equation in use in Section 9.1.2, and this
derivation shows that it is a consistent consequence of the kinetic
theory of gases.
Questions
The molar mass of air is 29 g mol-1
| Explain how the kinetic theory equation is fundamentally based on
Newton's second and third laws of motion.
Z
A 500 ml bottle contains air at a pressure of 1 x 105 Pa. How many
air molecules are in the bottle, if their rms speed is 520 m s-?
<c>= Nm
3 x 8.6 x 106 x 0.0125
2.0
= 161 250 m2 5-2
(a) What is the pressure of 2.48 kg of air contained in a scuba diving
tank, if the molecules have an rms speed of 500 ms and the
cylinder is of height 500 mm and diameter 160 mm?
(b) What would be the new rms speed of the molecules in the
scuba tank when it is immersed in water so its temperature
becomes 12°C?
...
V<c<> = 402 ms-1
137
THINKING
BIGGER
REACH FOR THE SKY! ☺
Unmanned balloons can fly high into the Earth's atmosphere from a ground-based launch, and are
regularly used for making a huge range of experimental measurements. Amateur balloon launches
are becoming increasingly common as the costs have fallen significantly.
Here, the UK High Altitude Society explains the basic science behind the hobby.
A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO HIGH ALTITUDE
BALLOONING
fig A Launching a high altitude balloon.
Balloon flight theory
The general theory is:
• A payload (an insulated box containing some electronics such as
a GPS and a radio to allow you to follow progress) is attached
to a balloon which is filled with helium (He).
The balloon is released and, as He is lighter than air, the balloon
rises and pulls the payload with it.
. As the balloon rises the outside pressure decreases which leads
to the helium inside the balloon expanding (imagine like it's
expanding to fill the gap as the outside pressure decreases), this
causes the balloon to stretch.
The balloon is made of a form of latex and is incredibly stretchy.
However it gets to a point where it can't stretch any more and
bursts.
Now that there isn't any upward pull from the balloon the
payload begins to fall to earth pulled by gravity, as it falls the
parachute opens up slowing its descent and it gently glides down
to earth.
Throughout the flight the GPS module in the payload box is
providing information on its position, this information is passed
through a microcontroller which reads the info and converts it
into another protocol and in most payloads transmits the data
over a radio link to the ground station. As a backup sometimes
there is also a mobile phone which sends the data as a SMS as
well (however this will only work near to the ground as mobile
phones don't get signal at high altitudes).
Therefore if you want to fly a HAB mission you need to
construct a payload box with a tracking device (e.g. GPS
module, microcontroller and then a radio/mobile phone).
Additional components include for example cameras and
temperature sensor. You also will need a parachute, a balloon
and some helium and permission to launch.
Permission in the UK comes from the CAA (Civil Aviation
Authority). For more details see http://ukhas.org.uk/
general:restrictions_legality. Two sites in the UK (both in
Cambridgeshire) maintain rolling permissions to launch, please
email the mailing list to get in touch if you're interested in this
option.
Getting a system that works is harder than it sounds, HAB
payloads are difficult to test in advance so there is a failure rate
that unfortunately affects us all. The better planned a payload/
flight the less chance of something going wrong. If something
doesn't go to plan you just need to learn from the problem, fix it
and try again – it has happened to us all!
• Extract from the website of the UK High Altitude Society, http://ukhas.org.uk/
general:beginners_guide_to_high_altitude_ballooning, as at 6 November 2014
Where else will I encounter these themes?
Book 1
6.1
6.2
7.1
7.2
7.3
8.1
138
TOPIC 9
Thermodynamics
CHAPTER
19.1
Heat and temperature
Introduction
When scuba divers need to surface in an emergency, they are trained to scream all the way up. This may sound a little
WP bizarre, but the training is designed to ensure that they do not have to think about expelling the gas in their lungs, but
will do so automatically through the screaming. As the pressure decreases on their way to the surface, the air in their
lungs expands. This could be very dangerous to their internal organs, particularly their lungs, and so the air must be expelled at
least as fast as it expands. This is illustrated in a similar although less extreme scenario: the bubbles from a diver's normal
exhaled breath will slowly get larger as they rise to the surface.
This chapter is all about the energy held by individual molecules, and how on a large scale this energy is responsible for many
macroscopic effects, such as the pressure exerted by a gas on a diver's lungs. We will learn about a large number of rules
governing the properties of gases, including their pressure, temperature, density, volume and quantity. These will be explained
from first principles in terms of the collisions of the molecules that make up the gas. In a more general sense, we will see how
the energy possessed by a group of molecules leads to the temperature of a sample and the transfer of heat energy.
All the maths you need
• Recognising and use of appropriate units (eg. converting between temperature scales)
• Finding arithmetic means (e.g. mean square speeds of gas molecules)
• Use of ratios (e.g. illustrating the gas laws)
• Estimating results (e.g. predicting the outcome on a gas of changes in its properties)
• Substituting numerical values into equations (e.g. calculations using the ideal gas equation)
124
9.1 Exam-style questions
[Note: In questions marked with an asterisk (*), marks will be awarded
for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the
points that you make are related or follow on from each other.
5 When your diaphragm contracts, the pressure in the chest
cavity is lowered below atmospheric pressure and air is forced
into your lungs.
CONNEN
1 If a fixed mass of gas in a weather balloon moves to a new
situation where the temperature is halved, and the pressure is
also halved, what would happen to the volume of the balloon?
A It would stay the same.
B It would become a quarter of its original value.
C It would halve.
D It would double.
[Total: 1]
[1]
2 How much energy is needed to melt 100 g of lead at 600 K?
Specific latent heat of fusion of lead = 23 kJ kg
Melting point of lead = 327°C
A 2.3J
B 23J
C 2300 kJ
D 2300J
[1]
[Total: 1]
(a) The diaphragm contracts and the lung capacity increases
by 20%. State two assumptions you would need to make to
calculate the new pressure in the lungs if the initial pressure
is known
[2]
(b) (i) The volume of air inhaled in a typical breath is
2.5 x 10-4mº and an adult takes about 25 breaths per
minute. Show that the mass of air taken into the lungs
each second is about 1 x 10-4kg.
Density of air = 1.2 kg m-
[2]
(ii) If body temperature is 37.6°C and the temperature
outside the body is 20.0°C, calculate the rate at which
energy is used to warm air up to body temperature.
Specific heat capacity of air = 1000 Jkg K-1 [2]
[Total: 6]
6 A student uses the apparatus shown to investigate the
relationship between pressure and volume of a gas.
3 The molar mass of oxygen molecules is 16 g. Assuming oxygen
behaves as an ideal gas, what is the root-mean-square speed of
oxygen molecules in a sample kept at 15®C?
A 21ms!
B 150ms-
C 670 ms?
D 440 000 ms
strong glass tube
- trapped air
pressure gauge
4 (a) A typical aerosol can is able to withstand pressures up to
12 atmospheres before exploding. A 3.0 x 10-4m aerosol
contains 3.0 X 1022 molecules of gas as a propellant. Show
that the pressure would reach 12 atmospheres at
a temperature of about 900 K
1 atmosphere = 1.0 105 Pa
*(b) Some such aerosol cans contain a liquid propellant. The
propellant exists inside the can as a liquid and a vapour.
Explain what happens when such an aerosol can is heated
to about 900 K.
[3]
[Total: 5]
[2]
pump
oil reservoir
140
9.1
1
Heat and temperature
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
define the concept of absolute zero and explain how the
average kinetic energy of molecules is related to the absolute
temperature
• identify the differences between scales of temperature
measurement
WP
explain how a thermistor can be calibrated in a potential
divider circuit to act as a thermostat
Temperature
Heating an object causes its temperature to rise. This seems a
very obvious statement, based on our everyday experience, but
what is really happening when we heat an object, and what do we
mean by 'temperature"?
To understand the concept of temperature, we need to think
about materials in terms of the molecules from which they are
made. According to the kinetic theory, when energy is supplied
to an object the molecules in that object take up the energy as
kinetic energy, and move faster. In solids, this is usually in the form
of vibrations, whereas if we are considering a gas, we imagine the
molecules whizzing around their container at a greater speed. It is
this kinetic energy that determines the temperature. If the average
kinetic energy of the molecules of a substance is greater, then it is
at a higher temperature.
It is important to remember that the internal kinetic energy on the
atomic scale is separate from the idea of overall movement of the
object. For example, as a cricket ball flies through the air, it has
kinetic energy due to its overall movement. In addition to this, its
molecules will be vibrating within it, and it is this internal aspect
of the energy that determines the temperature.
of molecules, then there will come a moment when all the kinetic
energy has been removed from the substance. The molecules will
no longer be moving at all. At this point, the temperature is said to
be absolute zero.
Different scales of temperature have historically placed
zero in arbitrary places compared with the average
internal kinetic energy of the molecules. For example,
Anders Celsius chose the freezing point of pure water as the
zero on his temperature scale, but Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit
placed zero at 32 degrees below the freezing point of water
(in the expectation that there would never be a temperature
colder than 0 °F to measure!). On these scales, absolute zero is
at -273.15°C and -459.67 °F. In 1848, Lord Kelvin defined an
absolute temperature scale which started with zero at absolute
zero. For convenience, he made the gaps in his scale identical
to those on the Celsius scale. This is known as the Kelvin scale
of temperature, or sometimes as absolute temperature. As
the units begin from a definite zero and go up as we add even
amounts of energy to the particles of the substance being
measured the various temperatures are not compared to
something else (such as the freezing point of water). This is why
the term absolute temperature is used. We do not use the word or
symbol for degrees' when quoting values on the Kelvin scale. For
example, the temperature at which lead becomes superconducting
is 7.19 kelvin, or 7.19 K.
The Scottish engineer William Rankine proposed a similar absolute
temperature scale, with degrees separated by the same amount as
in the Fahrenheit scale. The Rankine scale is now obsolete.
fig A A stationary piece of metal has no kinetic energy. Yet all its atoms are
vibrating all the time. Although overall these tiny velocities must sum to
zero (or else it would be moving), their kinetic energies give the object
its temperature.
Absolute temperature
Taking energy away from the molecules of a substance causes
its temperature to become lower. If you imagine a situation in
which energy is continuously being taken away from a collection
fig B William Thomson, who was made Baron Kelvin of Largs in 1892, was one
of Britain's most prolific and important scientists. He is buried next to
Isaac Newton in Westminster Abbey.
126
What have I studied before?
• The pressure on a solid
Density
The conservation of momentum and energy
Impulse and momentum change
• Collisions and Newton's laws of motion
• The kinetic energy equation
The potential divider
What will I study later?
Nuclear reactor heat generation and power
stations
The importance of heat pressure in stars and
stellar development
The emission of stellar radiation following black
body curves
Simple harmonic motion
Resonance and damping in molecular energy
transfer
What will I study in this chapter?
The difference between heat and temperature
• Scales of temperature
• The kinetic theory of gases
• The ideal gas equation
• Basic gas laws
Internal energy and the distribution of energy
through a gas sample
• Black body radiation
125
Thinking Bigger
9.7
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in this webpage.
000000000
1. The extract consists of an article from a UK-based volunteer society.
a. Comment on the style of the writing, in particular the quantity of paragraphs and level
of vocabulary used.
b. Give two reasons why the level of physics detail about the physical theories behind
balloon flight is relatively low.
2. Explain why a detailed understanding of the gas laws governing the flight of the balloon
is likely to be less important to balloon hobbyists than their capabilities with electronic
equipment.
Consider who is the
intended audience, and
what they would be most
interested in learning
about high-altitude
balloon experiments.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics elsewhere in this
book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the answers.
3. a. Explain this quote from the text: 'He is lighter than air'.
b. Draw a free-body force diagram of the balloon at the moment of release at the
ground.
c. Explain how the forces in your diagram in part b have magnitudes that mean there is a
resultant upward force.
d. A larger balloon can carry a heavier payload, but why would it also reduce flight time?
4. As the balloon rises, it expands until it bursts.
a. With reference to any relevant gas laws, explain why the balloon expands.
b. A common type of balloon will be 80 cm in diameter at ground level (15°C and
101 000 Pa pressure). If it expands to 4 times this diameter by the time it reaches
25 000 m altitude (-52°C), what is the pressure at this height?
c. Compare the average kinetic energy of air molecules at 25 000 m altitude with those
at ground level.
d. Draw a stress-strain curve for the balloon latex, from the moment of release to the
point the balloon bursts, labelling significant points on the curve with explanations of
their importance.
UVV
Consider the ideal gas
equation, and which
quantities in it will remain
constant during the
flight.
v
uru
Activity
Write a proposal for the extracurricular budget holder in your school outlining the idea of setting up a
High Altitude Balloon Club in the school. The proposal should explain the basic idea of the formation of
the club, including an experimental purpose for your launch. You should include details of the timescale
required for developing the equipment, a price list of the apparatus required, and information on how you
will obtain necessary national and local permissions.
Your proposal should
entice the budget holder
to pay for the club and at
least one balloon launch.
Consider what they are
likely to want to get for
the school from these
funds, for example good
publicity and an activity
for as many students as
possible. Minimised and
well-controlled costs are
some of the issues they
may need to think about.
YOU ARE
>
8.2
8.3
9.1
HERE
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
139
Heat and temperature
9.1
Questions
refers to large quantities of gases, as we may find in a balloon, for
example. If we change from the Boltzmann constant, k, to using
the gas constant for entire moles:
PV = nRT
where n is the number of moles of the gas, and Ris the universal
gas constant, R= 8.31 Jkg-mol-1.
(a) Draw a labelled diagram of the apparatus you would use
to verify that the pressure exerted by a fixed mass of gas at
constant temperature is inversely proportional to its volume.
(b) State the readings you would take. Explain how you would use
your measurements to verify this relationship between pressure
and volume. You may be awarded a mark for the clarity of your
answer.
(c) State one precaution that you would take in order to ensure
accurate results.
2
Explain why a sample of air will not behave exactly as an ideal gas.
The mole
The mole (abbreviated to mol) is an ŞI unit used to measure the
amount of a substance. One mole of a substance is defined to
consist of Avogadro's number of molecules of that substance.
NA is the symbol for Avogadro's number: 6.02 x 1023
For one mole of an ideal gas:
pV=RT
Comparing this with the equation of state:
PV = NAKT
:: NAX k=R
6.02 x 1023 x 1.38 x 10-23 = 8.31
WORKED EXAMPLE
3
Assuming air to be an ideal gas, calculate the number of moles of air
left in a scuba diver's tank if it has a volume of 12 litres and, when in
15°C water, the pressure is 2 x 107 Pa.
4
Devise an experiment to verify Charles's law. Using a diagram,
explain the measurements that would be made, how you would
keep the control variables constant, and how your results could be
analysed to show that you had 'proven' Charles's law.
What would be the pressure in a child's helium balloon at 20°C,
if it is a sphere of radius 20 cm, containing three moles of helium
gas?
V = r = (0.2) = 3.35 x 102m2
N = 3 x NA
= 3 x 6.02 x 1023
= 18.06 x 1023
NKT
Key definitions
Boyle's law states that for a constant mass of gas at a constant
temperature, the pressure exerted by the gas is inversely
proportional to the volume it occupies.
Charles's law states that for a constant mass of gas at a constant
pressure, the volume occupied by the gas is proportional to its
absolute temperature.
The pressure law states that for a constant mass of gas at a constant
volume, the pressure exerted by the gas is proportional to its
absolute temperature.
An ideal gas is a theoretical gas which does not suffer from the real
world difficulties that mean real gases do not perfectly follow the
gas laws.
The equation of state is the single equation that defines a gas in
terms of its pressure, volume, temperature and quantity: PV = NKT
p=
V
18.06 x 1023 x 1.38 x 10-23 x 293
3.35 x 10-2
= 217 914 Pa
= 218 000 Pa (3 sf)
Or use PV = nRT:
PV
D-ART
11
3 x 8.31 x 293
3.35 x 10-2
= 218 000 Pa
135
Heat and temperature
9.1
The root-mean-square speed, often abbreviated to rms speed,
is found by squaring the individual speeds of a set of molecules,
finding the mean of the squares, and then taking the square root of
that mean.
WORKED EXAMPLE
Find the rms speed of the following group of five molecules of
atmospheric nitrogen, as shown in fig B:
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the rms speed of helium molecules in a child's balloon
at 20°C?
(Atomic mass of helium, m = 6.65 x 10-27 kg)
T= 20 + 273 = 293 K
Im<c> KT
= x 1.38 x 10-23 x 293
= 6.0651 x 10-21)
v = 500ms
V = 520ms 1
V = 501 ms
v = 545 msi
V = 505 ms
m
6.0651 x 10-21
(6.65 x 10-27)
= 1 820 000
rms speed = V<c>
= V1820000
= 1350 ms
fig B
First find the square of each value:
V.2 = 250 000; v 2 = 270400; V2 = 255 025; 142 = 297 025;
V52 = 251001
The mean of the square values is:
(v.2 + vz? + Vz2 + 742 + Vg2)
The rms speed of helium molecules at 20°C is 1350 ms?
Questions
(250 000 + 270 400 + 255 025 + 297 025 + 251 001)
1323451
(a) What is the rms speed of four hydrogen molecules with speeds
of 890, 755, 902 and 866 ms-T?
(b) At what temperature would these hydrogen molecules be?
(Mass of H atom = 1.67 x 10-27 kg)
= 264 690.2
Finally, take the square root to get the rms speed:
V<c>= 264 690.2 = 514 ms]
2
Estimate the rms speed of molecules in the air in this room.
(WP
What would be represented by the area underneath the
Maxwell-Boltzmann curve?
Molecular kinetic energy
The average kinetic energy of any molecule in a gaseous sample
is proportional to the absolute temperature of the gas. They are
related by the expression:
m<c>= KT
where k is the Boltzmann constant, 1.38 x 10-23 JK-I. Here the unit
of temperature, T, is absolute temperature and must be in kelvin.
From this equation, relating kinetic energy and absolute
temperature, we can see that zero on the absolute scale of
temperature must indicate a situation where the molecules are
stationary. Their mass cannot change, so for the kinetic energy to
be zero at absolute zero, their rms speed must decrease to zero.
Copy a sketch graph of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
labelling the x-axis 'speed'.
(a) Mark a vertical line on your graph to show the energy
corresponding to the most probable speed of molecules. Label
this line Co-
(b) From Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics, the most probable speed (co).
the mean speed (<c>), and the rms speed (v <e>) are in the ratio:
1:1.13: 1.23
Mark two more vertical lines on your graph and label these
<> and <c>.
WP)
Learning tip
The idea that the molecules' average kinetic energy is
proportional to the absolute temperature is an assumption
within kinetic theory. We will see in Section 9.1.5 how this
follows consistently from the ideal gas laws, but these are also
founded on a set of assumptions which we must accept before
undertaking calculations using the equation:
m<c> KT
Key definitions
Internal energy is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of all
the molecules within a given mass of a substance.
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution is a mathematical function
that describes the distribution of energies amongst particles at a
given temperature.
Root-mean-square speed is the square root of the arithmetic mean
value of the squares of the speeds of particles in an ideal gas.
129
9.1
3
Heat transfer
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. define the concepts of specific heat capacity and specific latent heat for phase changes
use the equations AE = mcAg and AE = LAm
describe what is meant by black body radiator
Learning tip
Heat is only referred to when
energy is moved from one
object or material to another.
It is not correct to suggest that
an object has heat energy - in
that instance we refer to its
'internal energy.
We have seen that the temperature of a substance depends on the kinetic energy of the molecules
within it. As the molecules move, their bonds can pull on neighbouring molecules. Thus, lattice
vibrations in the solid can pass energy through the solid.
Imagine that one end of a long rod is being heated. In the hotter parts of the metal, the molecules
are vibrating faster and further. In the cooler parts of the rod, further from the heat source, the
molecules are moving slower. When a molecule with more energy pulls on one with less energy, they
share the energy more evenly, with the faster one slowing down and the slower one speeding up.
The effect of these transfers is that the increase in the internal kinetic energy caused by heating is
distributed throughout a substance, with the heat being passed from hotter areas to colder ones.
Specific heat capacity
Transferring the same amount of heat energy to two different objects will increase their internal
energy by the same amount. However, this will not necessarily cause the same rise in temperature
in both. The effect that transferred heat energy has on the temperature of an object depends on
three things:
1 the amount of heat energy transferred
2 the mass of the object
3 the specific heat capacity of the material from which the object is made.
How much the temperature rises is dependent upon the nature of a material, and is given by a
property known as its specific heat capacity, c. Different materials, and different phases of the
same substance, have different specific heat capacities because their molecular structures are
different, and so their molecules will be affected to different degrees by additional heat energy.
For a certain amount of energy, AE, transferred to a material, the change in temperature, 40, is
related to the mass of material, m, and the specific heat capacity, c, by the expression:
AE = mcao
With each quantity measured in SI units, this means that the specific heat capacity has units of
Jkg-1 K-1. The change in temperature, A7, is the same whether measured in degrees celsius or kelvin,
as the intervals are the same on both scales.
WORKED EXAMPLE
How long will a 2 kW kettle take to raise the temperature of 800 grams of water from 20°C to 100°C?
The specific heat capacity of water is 4200JkgK-1
A2 = 100 - 20 = 80°C = 80K
AE = mc A0 = 0.8 x 4200 x 80 = 268 800)
E
268 800 – 134.45
P 2000
So the kettle takes 2 minutes and 14 seconds to heat this water to boiling temperature. We assume that
no energy is wasted in heating the surroundings.
130
9.1
Kinetic theory equations
Thus the force this chosen particle exerts is:
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
derive and use the equation pV = Nm<c">
. derive and use the equation m<c<> EKT
F-Amv _ 2mu:
A
2L/
F
I
PV = 5 Nm<c>
This means that the pressure exerted on the shaded face by our
chosen particle is:
force mu ?/L
i p= area = 12
area
In Section 9.1.4, we learned the assumptions about ideal gases
that we accept in order to be able to use the equation of state
as a reasonable approximation to the behaviour of gases. These
assumptions lead us logically to be able to calculate the pressure
exerted by an ideal gas on the walls of its container.
Pressure is defined as force per unit area, so in order to derive
the equation for the pressure exerted by a gas, we must find an
expression for the force the particles exert on the walls.
.. p=
In order to find the overall pressure the gas exerts on the container
wall, we need to find the force exerted by all the gas particles in
the box. We saw in Section 9.1.2 that the molecules in a sample
of gas have a range of speeds. The total pressure of all the N
particles on this face will be the sum of the individual pressures:
"x (41x2 + 2 + 43x2 + ... + UNx2)
One of the assumptions of kinetic theory is that there are enough
molecules to apply statistics, and doing so gives:
(41x2 + 2x2 + 3x2 + ... + Unx?) = N<ux?>
mN<u>>
:
p=
3
We have only considered our particle travelling in the y direction,
but as all directions of motion are equally likely, only one-third
of all the gas particle momenta will be in the y direction. For a
general equation for the pressure of the gas, we need to alter
our equation to use the velocity value, c, which can be in any
direction.
fig A A gas particle in a cubic container will exert a force when it bounces off
the shaded face
Only one-third of the force we have calculated will then be
exerted on the face we have considered, so the pressure will have
a one-third factor in the equation:
1 Nm<c2>
Consider one of the particles of a gas contained in the cube
shown in fig A. Its velocity in the x direction, us, will take it across
the box to collide with the shaded face and collide elastically
with the container wall. It will rebound with the same velocity
in the opposite direction, -uy. With the particle having mass m.
this means that a change in momentum has occurred, equal to
-2muz. A force is needed to cause a change in momentum, and by
Newton's third law, this force from the container wall acting on the
particle is equal and opposite to the force of the particle acting
on the wall.
Newton's second law is that:
FAT = Amy or F-Am
As L' is the volume of the box, V, we rewrite the equation as:
p=! Nmęcz>
.. pV = Nm<c">
This equation is sometimes called the kinetic theory equation.
The change in momentum, -2mu,, will happen each time the
particle bounces back and forth across the box to collide with the
shaded face. As mass does not change, the change in momentum
can be regarded as mass times the change in velocity.
v= s= 2L
s 2L
Learning tip
The gas density (mass per unit volume) will be given by V. so the
kinetic theory equation can also be expressed as:
prip<c?>
136
9.1
2
Internal energy
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. define the concept of internal energy as the random distribution of potential and kinetic
energies amongst molecules
use the equation m<c<> = {KT
The average kinetic energy of the particles in a material gives the material its temperature. However, as
well as having kinetic energy, each molecule will have some potential energy, by virtue of its position
within the structure of the material, or in relation to other molecules in the substance. This potential
energy is due to the bonds between the molecules. If we sum the kinetic and potential energies of all
the molecules within a given mass of a substance, we have measured its internal energy.
It is important to note that the molecules do not all have the same amount of kinetic and potential
energies. This internal energy is randomly distributed across all the molecules, according to the
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.
Learning tip
In kinetic theory, we use the
word 'molecules' to describe
any particles. For example, if
we have a collection of helium
gas particles, we can refer to
them as molecules even
though we know that they
normally exist in a monatomic
state.
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
If we identify the individual velocity of each molecule in a particular sample, the values will range
from a few moving very slowly to a few moving very fast, with the majority moving at close to the
average speed. As they all have the same mass, their differences in kinetic energies are directly
dependent on the speeds. If we plot the kinetic energy against the number of molecules that have
that energy, we obtain a curved graph called the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, as in fig A.
Number of molecules
Energy
fig A The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of the speeds of a mixture of particles at one particular temperature.
The characteristic shape of the graph in fig A shows that:
• there are no molecules with zero energy
• only a few molecules have high energy
. there is no maximum value for the energy a molecule can have.
A Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution graph is for one specific temperature. As the temperature
changes, so the graph changes. The peak on the graph moves towards higher energies (and therefore
higher speeds) as the temperature increases.
Root-mean-square calculations
There are two different ways of determining the average speeds of molecules in a material which are
of interest to physicists. The peak of the graph represents the kinetic energy value with the greatest
number of molecules that have that energy. Therefore the speed corresponding to this kinetic energy
is the most probable speed, co, if we were to select a molecule at random. The second and more useful
average is the root-mean-square speed, which has the symbol <c2>. This is the speed associated
with the average kinetic energy, am<cº>, where c is the speed of the particle, and m is its mass.
128
9.1
Charles's law
About 140 years after Boyle published his law, the French scientist
Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac published two further gas laws. One
was based on unpublished data from experiments undertaken by
Jacques Charles. Charles's law states that:
The pressure law can be demonstrated using the apparatus shown in
fig D. Measurements of the gas pressure and temperature can be
datalogged to produce a graph of pressure against absolute
temperature, which will give a straight best-fit line indicating that:
POT
For a constant mass of gas at a constant pressure, the volume occupied
by the gas is proportional to its absolute temperature.
This law can be shown in symbols as:
V&T
Pressure/Pa
Volume/m3
Absolute temperature/K
fig E Graph of data from pressure law experiment.
Absolute temperature/K
fig C Graph of data from Charles's law experiment.
The pressure law
Gay-Lussac's other gas law sometimes bears his name, and
sometimes is simply referred to as the pressure law:
For a constant mass of gas at a constant volume, the pressure exerted
by the gas is proportional to its absolute temperature.
This law can be shown in symbols as:
pot
Investigation
Investigating the pressure law
Ideal gases
The three gas laws above were worked out from graphs of
experimental results which showed distinct, straight best-fit
lines, allowing scientists to claim them as empirical laws (laws
worked out from experimental data). However, if very accurate
experiments are undertaken with a variety of different gases,
we find that the laws are not perfectly accurate. For example,
Charles's law suggests that if we reduce the temperature to zero
kelvin, the gas would have zero volume - it would disappear. This
does not happen, as the gas volume cannot reduce to less than
the combined volume of its molecules.
The three gas laws are idealised, and would work perfectly if we
could find a gas that did not suffer from the real world difficulties
that real gases have. An ideal gas would have the following
properties:
1 The molecules have negligible size.
2 The molecules are identical.
3 All collisions are perfectly elastic and the time of a collision is
significantly smaller than the time between collisions.
4 The molecules exert no forces on each other, except during
collisions.
5 There are enough molecules so statistics can be applied.
6 The motion of the molecules is random.
Assuming an ideal gas, we can combine the three gas laws
to produce a single equation relating the pressure, volume,
temperature and amount of a gas:
PV = NkT
where N is the number of molecules of the gas, and k is
the Boltzmann constant. The temperature must be absolute
temperature in kelvin.
This is known as the equation of state for an ideal gas,
expressed in terms of the number of molecules present.
Sometimes, a more practically useful version can be used which
fig D Apparatus to demonstrate the pressure law. The temperature and
pressure readings could be taken by electronic sensors and the data
logged by an attached computer.
134
9.1
4.
Ideal gas behaviour
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
. define the concept of an ideal gas and explain the relationships between its pressure,
temperature and volume
use the equation pV = Nkt for an ideal gas
Boyle's law
Over the last 400 years, scientists investigating the physics of gases have determined a number of
laws governing their behaviour. The first of these was discovered by Robert Boyle, an Irish physicist
working at Oxford University. Boyle's law states that:
For a constant mass of gas at a constant temperature, the pressure exerted by the gas is inversely proportional
to the volume it occupies.
If you imagine lying on an air mattress, after you sink slightly, it provides a force to hold you up. Your
body squashes the volume of the mattress, making it smaller. This increases the pressure exerted by the
gas inside, until the force applied by the gas pressure equals your weight. This is Boyle's law in action.
WP
Investigation
Investigating Boyle's law
fig A Apparatus to demonstrate Boyle's law.
Boyle's law can be demonstrated using the apparatus shown in fig A. Measurements of the length of air
trapped in the vertical glass column represent the volume of the gas, and the pressure is measured using
the barometer. A graph of pressure against 1/volume will give a straight best-fit line indicating that:
pa v
Pressure/Pa
1/length/cm!
fig B Graph of data from a Boyle's law experiment.
Make sure you have a good understanding of this practical as your understanding of the experimental
method may be assessed in your examinations.
133
Heat and temperature
9.1
Questions
OF
Temperature scale Celsius Fahrenheit Kelvin Rankine
Symbol
Boiling point of water
100
212 373.15 671.67
(at 1 atm = 101325 Pa)
Freezing point of water
273.15 491.67
(at 1 atmn = 101325 Pa)
Absolute zero
-273.15 -459.67
table A Comparing four scales of temperature.
Convert the following temperatures:
(a) 27°C into kelvin
(b)-173°C into kelvin
(c) 100°C into kelvin
(d) 288 K into degrees celsius.
2 Explain what will happen in the circuit in fig C as the temperature
rises.
Learning tin
Converting degrees celsius to kelvin, add 273.15.
Converting kelvin to degrees celsius, subtract 273.15.
C is nearer the beginning of the alphabet to K, so to go back from K
to °C, we subtract!
3 What changes need to be made to the circuit in fig Cin order to
allow the thermistor to be calibrated for use as a thermostat?
Investigation
Investigating thermostats
In Book 1, Section 3.2.3, we saw how a potential divider circuit can
be used with a sensor component to control a second circuit. This
can be useful, for example, if we want to control a heating or cooling
circuit, such as with the circuit shown in fig C.
Kev definitions
Kinetic theory is the idea that consideration of the microscopic
movements of particles will predict the macroscopic behaviour of
a substance.
Absolute zero is the theoretical temperature at which molecules will
no longer be moving, all the kinetic energy has been removed.
Absolute temperature is any temperature scale that starts at
absolute zero.
M
)
C
fig C Investigate how the motor (C) speed adjusts as the thermistor (A)
temperature is altered. This circuit could be used to control a
cooling fan
Many electronic components have a switch on voltage of 5 V. For
example, the control circuit to switch on a large air conditioner
could be used with a thermistor in a potential divider circuit and
would only switch on when the p.d. across it is 5 V. Altering the value
of the other resistor in the potential divider circuit would then
control the temperature level at which the air conditioner was
switched on.
You can use a circuit like that shown in fig C to find the output
voltage at different temperatures and thus calibrate the thermistor.
This calibration should then allow you to replace the fixed resistor
with a variable resistor that you can set, so that the output exceeds
5 volts only when a particular temperature is reached. Make sure
you have a good understanding of this practice as your
understanding of the experimental method may be assessed in your
examinations.
127
9.1
Black body radiation
A black body radiator is a theoretical body which completely absorbs all radiation that lands on
it. We can imagine a cavity with a tiny hole in one side, and the hole itself is the black body. It is
considered to absorb all radiation that lands on the hole, as it goes into the box (or cavity) and
bounces around with no chance of escaping out of the hole before it is absorbed inside the box.
No radiation is reflected, hence the name 'black body'.
Learning tip
You will learn more about
black body radiators in
Topic 12, where they will be
considered further in the
context of stars and galaxies.
fig C A box with a tiny hole in the surface is considered to be a perfect black body.
All objects emit electromagnetic radiation. Infrared cameras can detect radiation from our bodies,
but with our eyes we can only see visible EM radiation from hot objects; for example, the red glow
from a fire. We know that good absorbers of radiation are also good emitters, and a black body
radiator is considered to be a perfect emitter. It will emit EM radiation at all wavelengths, and how
much of each wavelength will depend on the black body's temperature (see Section 12.1.1).
Questions
1 (a) How much heat energy must be supplied to raise the temperature of 1200ml of water from 20°C
to 65°C?
(b) How long would a 2200 W heater take to boil 3 litres of water initially at 100°C?
(1 litre of water has a mass of 1 kilogram. Specific latent heat of vaporisation of water = 2260 kJ kg )
2 Heating up half a kilogram of ice at -8°C until it is water at 8°C requires 192 200 joules of energy. Show
the separate calculations necessary to determine this value.
3
Table A shows that the specific heat capacity of copper is 390) kg 'K-1
A student read part of a chemistry textbook. The book said that copper at 1085 °C had been supplied with
4000) of energy, but its temperature remained at 1085 °C. Explain how this could be possible.
Key definitions
Specific heat capacity is the energy required to raise the temperature of one kilogram of a substance by
one degree kelvin.
Specific latent heat is the energy required to change the state of one kilogram of a substance at a constant
temperature.
A black body radiator is a theoretical object, that completely absorbs all radiation that lands on it.
132
Heat and temperature
9.1
WP
Learning tip
For melting, L is known as the specific latent heat of fusion.
For boiling, L is known as the specific latent heat of vaporisation.
Investigation
Investigating specific heat capacity
It is quite straightforward to measure the specific heat capacity of
most materials (some values are given in table A). Providing you can
measure the heat energy put in to a known mass of the material, and
insulate the material well enough that virtually all this heat goes
towards raising the temperature, then a close measurement can be
made. To gain very accurate measurements requires significantly
more complex insulation. The inaccuracy in this rough experiment
can usually be kept to under 5% with careful experimentation.
For a certain mass of material, m, the amount of additional
energy, AE, needed to make the phase change is related to the
specific latent heat, L, by the expression:
AE = LAm
With each quantity measured in SI units, this means that the
specific latent heat has units of Jkg-!. The change in temperature
is zero for any phase change, so the specific heat capacity need
not be considered if the temperature is constant and only the state
of matter changes.
WORKED EXAMPLE
How long will a 150 W freezer take to freeze 650 grams of water
which is already at 0 °C? The specific latent heat of fusion of water
is 334 000) kg ?
AE = LAm = 334 000 x 0.65 = 217 100J
fig A Investigating specific heat capacity experimentally
E_217100 - 1447 s
P 150
So the freezer takes a little over 24 minutes to freeze this water.
We assume that no energy is gained from the surroundings.
1670
1020
WP
Substance Specific heat capacity/Jkg K-1
water
4200
ice
2100
steam
1996
wood
air (50°C)
aluminium
900
marble
860
iron/steel
450
copper
390
silver
240
mercury
140
table A Some typical specific heat capacities.
Investigation
Investigating specific latent heat of fusion
It is quite straightforward to measure the specific latent heat of
fusion of water. Providing you can measure the heat energy put into
a known mass of ice, and set up the experiment well enough that
virtually all this heat goes towards melting the ice, then a close
measurement can be made. A control funnel of crushed ice can also
be used in which the heater is off, so we can see how much ice
would have melted anyway. The difference in mass of water
collected between the heated funnel and the control gives us the
mass to use in the calculation.
immersion
heater
melting
crushed ice
joulemeter
38531 J
beaker
beaker
to power supply
+
22
Specific latent heat
To melt a solid that is already at the temperature at which it melts
requires an input of additional energy. This energy input does
not raise the temperature, but is exclusively used in breaking the
bonds between molecules to alter the state of the material. The
amount of additional energy needed to melt it is determined by
two things:
1 the mass of the solid substance
2 the specific latent heat of fusion of the substance.
How much energy is needed to alter the molecular configuration
is dependent upon the nature of a material, and is given by a
property known as its specific latent heat, L. Different materials,
and different phase changes of the same substance, have different
specific latent heat values because their molecular structures
are different, and so their molecules will be affected to different
degrees by additional heat energy.
electronic balance
fig B Investigating the specific latent heat of fusion of ice.
Make sure you have a good understanding of this practice as your
understanding of the experimental method may be assessed in your
examinations.
131
Exam-style questions
9.1
Air is trapped in a glass tube of uniform cross-sectional area.
As the pressure of the trapped air is increased, the length of
trapped air decreases. The student collects data and plots the
following graph.
7 A student wants to determine the specific heat capacity of
aluminium. She heats a block of alurninium by supplying
electrical energy to a heater that is inserted into the block
as shown.
500
450
thermometer
Pressure/kPa
t ututut
heater
aluminium
block
otu
(a) Draw the electrical circuit she should use.
(b) She writes the following plan:
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Length of trapped air/cm
(a) State the variables that should be controlled in this
investigation
[2]
(b) Theory suggests that for the air trapped in the tube, the
pressure p is inversely proportional to the volume V.
Use the graph to show that this relationship is correct.
State an assumption that you are making.
(c) On the day that the investigation was carried out, the
temperature in the laboratory was 20°C.
Calculate the number of air molecules trapped in the tube.
cross-sectional area of tube = 7.5 x 10-5m2
(d) State how the graph would change if
(i) the air molecules in the tube were replaced by the
same number of molecules of hydrogen gas. [1]
(ii) the temperature of the laboratory was substantially
higher.
[Total: 12]
Measure the temperature of the block at the start
Turn on the electric current
Determine the energy flowing for a certain time
Turn off the current and measure the temperature
This will give me the specific heat capacity if I divide
the total energy by the mass and temperature rise
Write an improved plan that includes details of the method
to be used and any precautions needed to produce an
accurate value for the specific heat capacity of aluminium.
[2]
[6]
[Total: 7]
141
