Optics
5.3
Investigation
WP
Investigating refractive index
Using the equation for refractive index with experimental
measurements will allow us to measure the refractive index of a
material, as long as we know n for the other material. We usually do
these experiments with air as the known material. As the speed of
light in air is virtually unchanged in comparison to a vacuum, we
take the refractive index of air to be nair = 1.00.
As the frequency stays constant throughout refraction, and the
speed of light in a vacuum must be constant, if we keep the same
angle of incidence then the sine of the angle of refraction will be
proportional to the wavelength. Smaller wavelengths (violet) will
be closer to the normal in the glass (compare this with fig E).
Light bends towards
the normal as it
enters the glass.
Light bends away
from the normal as
it leaves the glass.
white light
glass prism
red
orange
yellow
green
blue
indigo
CE
violet
fig E Refraction affects different wavelengths (colours) differently.
On emergence from the glass prism, take care to continue with a
as the angle in air:
fig D Measuring angles of incidence and refraction in order to find the
refractive index of a material.
sind, - csina,
sind,
FA
Using a setup like that shown in fig D, we can take several different
measurements of the angle of incidence (,) and the corresponding
angle of refraction (02). The block used should be an exact semicircle,
and we aim the ray to meet the glass at exactly the midpoint of the
flat side. This means that the ray passing through the block will be
travelling along a radius of the semicircle, and will leave the glass
exactly along the normal to the circular edge. So the only change in
direction occurs at the flat side of the block. Comparing the equation
we have for refractive index with the equation for a straight line:
nisino, = n2siniz
n = 1.00
sino, = n, sind
sind
The sine of the angle of refraction (d, on emergence) will now
be inversely proportional to the wavelength. Smaller wavelengths
(violet) will be further from the normal in the air (compare this
with fig E). As the angles of incidence on emergence are not all
the same, due to the dispersion when they first entered the glass,
the colour spreading effect is amplified, creating the
familiar rainbow, or spectrum, of colours.
(WP
Questions
...
sind, = n2
What happens to each of the following when a ray of light travels
from air into clear plastic?
(a) speed (b) wavelength (c) frequency
2 Why does the head of the giraffe in fig B appear to be disconnected
from the body?
y = mx + c
A plot of sine, on the y-axis against sine, on the x-axis should
produce a straight best-fit line that passes through the origin. The
gradient, m, of this line will be equal to the reciprocal of the
refractive index for glass.
When light travels from air into glass (n class = 1.50) with an incident
angle of 25®, what is the angle of refraction inside the glass?
Dispersion
One of the most well known phenomena in physics is the splitting
of white light into a rainbow of colours by a prism, as shown in
fig E.
n sind, = n2sine
Kev definitions
Refraction is a change in wave speed when the wave moves
from one medium to another. There is a corresponding change in
wave direction, governed by Snell's law.
Refractive index, n, can be defined in several ways, but it is
fundamentally a result of the change in wave speed:
refractive indeve speed of light in vacuum
speed of light in the medium
na VFX
n=-
If the ray enters a prism from air (n = 1.00) our equations
become:
csino
sino, =-
fasino,
Snell's law:
nsing, = nesina
The values of n, and n are the refractive indices in each medium,
and the values of 0, and , are the angles that the ray makes to the
normal to the interface between the two media, at the point the ray
meets that interface.
sino2 =c
173
53
Image formation
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
trace the paths of rays through lenses to form images
understand the terms real image and virtual image
use the lens formula to calculate image magnification
What is an image?
When rays of light coming from one site on an object are focused to meet at the same point, there
will be an image of that site on the object at that point. In fig A, the rays travelling from the boy's feet
are refracted by the lens and meet again at a point on the screen. The image of his feet will be at this
point. Similarly, an image of his head is also produced by the lens. This process will happen for rays
coming from all parts of an object, so a complete image of the object appears. The rays shown in
fig A follow these rules:
• a ray hitting the centre of the lens continues in a straight line
• a ray parallel to the principal axis will pass through the focal point on the other side
• a ray passing through the focus on its way to the lens will emerge parallel to the principal axis.
convex
lens
piece of paper
object
real, inverted
image
fig A When light rays from an object meet again, an image will be formed.
As the light rays forming the object in fig A actually meet at each point on the screen, the image
appears on the screen. This is known as a real image, and is common with convex lenses. Diverging
lenses always spread the rays apart, so that they will not meet at a point and so cannot illuminate
a screen with a real image. Fig B shows a virtual image being produced, using variations on our
standard image forming rays.
diverging
Learning tip
Only two rays are needed to
find the position of an image.
The third can be used for
confirmation
lens
object
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
image
fig B Formation of a virtual image by a concave lens.
The orientation of the image is one of its properties. In fig A, the image is upside-down compared to
the original object. We say it is inverted. However, in fig B, the image is upright.
179
5.3
Image calculations
There is an equation that links the positions of image and object
with the focal length of a thin lens. This is the lens formula:
For each w and v value, we need to calculate the reciprocal. This will
then allow us to draw a graph of on the y-axis against on the
X-axis, which should produce a straight best-fit line, as shown in fig E.
1/14
1/16
object distance (m) image distance (m) focal length (m)
1 1 1
u v
This equation uses a convention known as 'real is positive'. As
shown in fig C, all the measurements made would be positive. If a
diverging lens is used, it would have a negative focal length value.
If a virtual image were formed, on the same side of the lens as a
real object, the value of v would be negative.
1/4
-
2.
-
-
-
www
-
fig E Lens formula experimental results graph.
-
-
-
-
-
-
object
By comparing the lens formula with that for a straight-line graph, we
can find the focal length of the lens by reading the y-intercept from
the graph.
1 1 1
ūt
-
himage
-
1
1
-
1
...
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
*
vfu
1 1 1
-
.
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
fig C Typical lens formula measurements.
and y = mx + C
The y-intercept from the graph will be the value of the reciprocal of
the focal length,
Learning tip
The SI units used in the lens formula should be metres.
However, as long as all three variables have the same units, the
equation will be consistent and correct. For example, if you measure
u and vin centimetres, these values can be used in the equation to
find the focal length, and the answer will also be in centimetres.
Investigation
Investigating the lens formula
Using a setup like that shown in fig D, we can alter the position of
the object and measure u. For each object distance, we move the
screen back and forth until the clearest possible image is formed on
the screen. We then measure the image distance, v.
Magnification
When an image is formed, we can compare its size to that of the
original object. For example, an image of a tree formed on the
retina of the eye must be smaller than the real tree, or it would not
fit onto the retina. The magnification is a numerical value given
to measure this size comparison. If an image is smaller than the
original object, the image is said to be diminished.
image size
magnification =
object size
mh
WP)
Note that units have not been included in this equation.
Magnification is a ratio: how many times bigger the image
is than the object. As long as the units on top and bottom
of the fraction are the same, it will be correct. Here, we
have used the height as the size
measurement to compare. Any size measurement will be valid, as
long as it is the same dimension measurement on both image and
object.
Careful examination of the similar triangles in fig C will show you
that the magnification can also be calculated from:
m=
fig D Lens formula experiment.
180
5.3
Total internal reflection
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand that waves can be reflected and transmitted at an
interface between media
normal
<o
understand the term critical angle
medium 1
medium 2
predict whether total internal reflection will occur at an
interface
i is less than critical angle
normal
0,= 0
Refraction revisited
When waves pass from one medium into another, some wave
energy will pass through and some will be reflected. The
proportions will depend on the amount of refraction and the angle
of incidence.
-
-
medium 1
medium 2
-
i equals critical angle
normal
1
10.>
medium 1
medium 2
angle of incidence greater
than critical angle
fig B Moving from refraction to total internal reflection.
Critical angle calculations
From Snell's law, we could find the critical angle for a material:
n sind, = nysine,
If we take medium 1 to be the optically more dense material,
then 8, must be 90° when the light is at the critical angle, .
in medium 1.
n sind, = n sine,
nsin. = n sin 90°
sin 90º = 1
n sind. = n2
fig A Partial transmission and partial reflection of light at a media interface.
In the diagrams of fig B we can see a ray of light trying to leave
an optically more dense medium. In these examples, the partial
reflection is not drawn. The first diagram shows simple refraction,
for which we could use Snell's law to make some calculations.
The angle in the less dense medium is greater than the incident
angle inside the more dense medium. In the second diagram, the
incident angle has been increased. From Snell's law, we find that
at this critical angle, the ray would emerge in the less dense
medium at an angle of 90º – it would emerge right along the
interface. If the angle within the more dense medium is increased
further, the emergent angle should increase also, but this would
then be greater than 90°, which means the ray emerges within
the more dense medium. This is not refraction, as that requires a
change in medium. This means that Snell's law cannot apply. In
this case, what does happen is that all the wave energy is reflected
inside the more dense medium, and the angles follow the law of
reflection. This is total internal reflection (TIR).
sin
= m2
If the situation involves a light ray emerging into air, then the
equation becomes:
sind = ni
If we know the critical angle, then that will give us the refractive
index for the material:
sin.
174
5.3
Polarisation
polarisers
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand what is meant by plane polarisation
describe how polarisation can be used with models to
investigate stresses in structures
no
vibrations
vertical
vibrations
vibrations in
all directions
fig B Polaroid filters transmit light waves if their plane of polarisation matches
with the orientation of the filter.
Plane polarisation
Transverse waves have oscillations at right angles to the direction
of motion. In many cases, the plane of these oscillations might
be in one fixed orientation. Fig A shows the electric (red) and
magnetic (blue) fields in an electromagnetic wave. In this example
of, say, a light wave, the electric fields only oscillate in the vertical
plane. The wave is said to be plane polarised or, more precisely,
vertically plane polarised. For electromagnetic waves, the plane of
the electric field's oscillations is the one that defines its plane
of polarisation
Fig B illustrates the effects of Polaroid filters on light from a bulb.
It starts unpolarised, with vibrations in all directions. The first
filter only permits vertical Vibrations, so they are selected, and the
light is transmitted vertically plane polarised. The second filter
is oriented in the same vertical direction, and the light will pass
through this without change. The third Polaroid filter is oriented
horizontally. This blocks vertically polarised light, and so no waves
are transmitted beyond it. The second and third filters are referred
to as 'crossed Polaroids', as their orientations are at right angles
and, together, they will always block all light.
Investigation
Investigating structural stresses
We can use crossed Polaroids to observe stress concentrations in
clear plastic samples.
fig A A polarised electromagnetic wave.
Often, many waves travel together, with oscillations in a variety of
planes. In this case, light from this source is said to be unpolarised.
This is how light emerges from a light bulb, a candle and the Sun.
Learning tip
Polarisation is only possible with transverse waves. If a wave is
polarised, it must be a transverse wave.
Polaroid Amalyserl. A20-050
fig C Stress analysis using crossed Polaroids.
Polarising filters
Unpolarised radiation can be passed through a filter that will
transmit only those waves that are polarised in a particular
plane. Waves on a string could be polarised simply by passing
the string through a card with a slit in it, which will then only
allow oscillations to pass through if they are in line with the slit.
For light waves, the polariser is a piece of plastic impregnated
with chemicals with long chain molecules, called a Polaroid sheet.
The Polaroid filter will only allow light waves to pass if their
electric field oscillations are orientated in one direction.
The first Polaroid produces polarised light, which passes into the
plastic sample. Stressed areas have their molecules in slightly
different orientations, and this will affect the passage of the light
through the plastic. This effect varies with the colour of the light.
When the second Polaroid acts on the emerging light, some of the
light will have travelled slightly more slowly through the plastic and
will destructively interfere with other light waves of the same colour.
Thus, depending on the degree of stress in the plastic, the colours
that emerge will vary. Differently stressed areas appear as different
182
5.
33
Lenses
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand that lenses focus rays of light and be able to trace the paths of rays through lenses
explain the terms focal length and power of a lens
use the equations for the power of a lens, and combinations of twin lenses
Refraction in a lens
A lens is an object made of clear material that has curved faces so that it changes the direction of
light rays. The two most common types of lenses have convex or concave profiles, as shown in fig A.
The shape of the lens causes a particular effect on the rays of light. Convex lenses cause the rays
to converge. Concave lenses cause the rays to diverge.
focus
focus
concave lens
convex lens
fig A Aconverging (convex) lens and a diverging (concave) lens. Very carefully trace your finger along the top ray shown
on each lens. Imagine the normal line, and think where the refraction will take the ray at entry and exit from the
glass. The shapes of the lens profiles cause their effects.
Rays of light from a distant object will arrive at the lens parallel to each other. A converging lens
will bring these rays together at a point, called the focus, or focal point. A diverging lens will
spread these rays apart so they will not meet at a point. By looking at where the rays emerge, we can
imagine where they would have come from if they had always been travelling apart. Back tracing
the rays shows that they appear to have all come from a focal point. In this case, it is referred to as a
virtual focus. In each case, the distance from the lens to the focal point is called the focal length.
The rays of light The rays of light appear
converge at the
to come from the focus.
focus.
parallel rays
of light
parallel rays
of light
converging
lens
focal length
focal length
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
diverging
lens
fig B Converging lenses focus light at the focal point. Diverging lenses have a virtual focus.
176
Optics
5.3
Investigation
WP
Investigating total internal reflection
Using a setup like that shown in fig C, we can steadily increase the
angle of incidence (0) within the more dense glass and observe the
emerging angle of refraction (0) in the air. As the angle inside the
glass increases, we shall see a partial reflection of the ray within the
glass growing stronger in intensity, until the critical angle is reached
inside the glass.
but on a larger scale can be used to guide sunlight to the interior
of large buildings. Alternatively, optical fibres can be used to carry
information as light pulses (as in fibre broadband) or as actual
images, (in uses such as a medical endoscope - see fig E).
reflected light
yeyepiece lens
from object
objective lens
protective sheath
optical fibres
light from source
light from light source
image of
WP
object
fig E A medical endoscope is used to view the body's internal organs without
cutting the patient open. Light is sent in along one optic fibre, and the
reflection is carried away along the other for viewing by medical staff.
Questions
| What is meant by the term critical angle?
Explain how the reflections shown in fig D are possible.
fig C Measuring angles of incidence and refraction in order to find the
critical angle and refractive index for glass.
The block used should be an exact semicircle, and we aim the ray to
travel through the glass and hit exactly the midpoint of the flat side.
This means that the ray passing through the glass will be travelling
along a radius of the semicircle and will have entered the glass
exactly along the normal to the circular edge. So the only change in
direction occurs at the flat side of the block. By carefully recording
the critical angle, when the light emerges, we can calculate the
refractive index for the glass.
3 Water has a refractive index of 1.33. What is the critical angle for
this water?
Explain why fish can observe predator birds in any part of the sky by
only viewing a cone above them, as shown in fig F.
Miglass
sind
Applications of TIR
Fig D shows the movement of light through 45° prisms. The
left-hand example is commonly used in periscopes, and the
right-hand diagram is the fundamental basis for reflective signs.
wwwwwww
fig F Fish can easily see all of the world above the water.
V
w wwww
Wwww
***
Key definitions
The critical angle is the largest angle of incidence that a ray in a
more optically dense medium can have and still emerge into less
dense medium. Beyond this angle, the ray will be totally internally
reflected.
Total internal reflection (TIR) requires two conditions to be met:
• the ray is attempting to emerge from the more dense medium
• the angle between the ray and the normal to the interface is
greater than the critical angle.
fig D Total internal reflection helps us direct light usefully.
A more complex use for TIR is in fibre optics. A thin glass fibre
can guide light along its length by the repeated TIR at the internal
edges. This may just be used for decorative lighting,
175
Optics
5.3
Learning tip
Image properties can be:
• real or virtual
• magnified or diminished (or the same size)
• upright or inverted.
Questions
A converging lens has a focal length of 6.0 cm. An object of height 2.0 cm is placed 12.0 cm from the lens.
On graph paper, draw a ray diagram of this situation to scale. Draw rays to determine the location of
the image.
Describe three properties of the image in fig B.
3
Looking at the triangles formed by the rays, object and image in fig C, explain why the magnification can
be calculated from the ratio of the image distance and object distance.
Explain why the x-intercept on fig E will also give us the value of
5
Use a ruler to take measurements from the picture in fig Fand calculate the magnification of
the virtual image shown in the lens.
(WP)
fig F Magnification
Key definitions
A real image:
• can be projected onto a screen
• is on the other side of the lens from the object.
A virtual image:
• cannot be projected onto a screen
• is on the same side of the lens as the object.
Magnification is a numerical value given to measure the size comparison between image and
original object:
image size
magnification = obiect size
181
Thinking Bigger
5.3
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the extract.
1. The extract opposite is from a paper in a peer-reviewed scientific journal on the forensic
lab investigations that can be done on glass.
a. The paper quoted is a type of scientific paper known as a 'review paper', in which the
author does not present new research, but summarises other scientists' primary research
in order to present a large body of current knowledge. How does the way the paper is
written tell you that this is a review paper?
b. Is there any bias present in the report? Explain how you have decided on your
answer to this.
1850000000000000
Command word
If the word explain is
used in a question, your
answer should clearly
describe the thing you
are explaining. You'll need
to use your reasoning
and maybe examples to
support your point.
UN
0800300587080001
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics earlier in
this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the
answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work in context with what
you have already learned in your course.
2. Explain why a crystal in oil will become invisible if the two have identical refractive
indices.
3. Why will a change in the temperature of oil change its refractive index?
4. Why does a refractometer need a powerful microscope system as part of its set up?
5. Glass from different spectacle lenses from the same manufacturer can often have
identical refractive indices. Suggest another method by which two large (>1 cm2) pieces
of glass from different lenses could be identified to match up with their original owners.
Writing Scientifically
As you read these
articles identify
everything that
contributes to writing
a scientific article. For
instance, the vocabulary,
sources, the way
information is presented.
Make sure your own
answers are written
scientifically
Activity
Resistivity can be affected by the atomic impurities in a material. Prepare a set of experimental
instructions for use by a forensic lab technician to identify the resistivity of a sample of glass in order to
compare a sample found on a suspect with a sample from a broken window. Explain what quantities
should be measured, how to analyse the measurements to determine the resistivity, and what level of
accuracy should be expected in the comparisons. Include instructions for the preparation of the sample,
including cutting to the correct size and shape.
100000000000
Glass is an insulator,
so this may need very
high voltages to create
tiny currents. You will
need to consider what
scales of measurement
any electrical devices
would need, and also
what safety precautions
would be necessary.
By Maureen Bottrell, from Forensic Science Communications, April 2009 - Volume 11 - Number 2, published by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Quantico, Virginia, USA
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.5
YOU ARE
HERE
5.4
185
What have I studied before?
• Definitions of the properties of waves, such as
frequency, wavelength and speed
Models of waves and wave processes
Calculations of wave speed
The transmission of waves
Some considerations about telescopes used
in astronomy
What will I study later?
• The focusing of a particle beam in a particle
accelerator (A level)
• The use of telescopes in astronomy (A level)
Some of the optical ideas behind an electron
microscope (A level)
Interactions of light with its medium at an atomic
level (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
• The definition of refraction, and how to find and
calculate the refractive index
Effects on the properties and movement of a wave
due to changes in its medium
The phenomenon of total internal reflection
The effects of lenses, and calculations using the
lens formula
How lenses can form images, and how to
calculate the magnification of the images
The phenomenon of polarisation, and some of its
implications and applications
171
5.3
Refraction
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand what is meant by refraction
understand how to measure the refractive index of a solid
material
use the Snell's law equation relating to refraction
fig B Refraction can alter your perspective.
Refraction
When waves pass from one medium into another, there is
a change in speed. The frequency remains constant, so the
change in speed causes a change in wavelength. If the waves are
approaching the interface between the two media at an angle then
the change in speed causes a change in direction as well. This is
called refraction.
This part of the
The waves are
wave slows down
travelling in this
first.
direction
glass or
water
The values of n, and n, are the refractive indices in each medium.
The values of , and are the angles that the ray of light makes
to the normal to the interface between the two media at the point
the ray meets that interface, as shown in fig C.
w
medium 1
WW
air
refractive
index = n,
medium 2
The waves
end up
travelling
in this
direction
The waves travel
more slowly in
this medium.
refractive
index = n,
fig C Defining refraction.
fig A Wave speed depends on the medium, and refraction is caused by a
change in medium changing the wave speed.
Any ray crossing an interface along the normal line does not change
direction at all, as the wavefronts are parallel to the edge and so their
wavelength is equally changed along the length of the wavefront. If
the wavefront is at an angle to the interface, then the part that hits
first will change speed first, and the wavefront becomes bent because
different parts of it are travelling at different speeds.
The changes in direction caused by refraction are the basis for the
functioning of lenses, and can lead to optical illusions.
A measure of the amount of refraction caused by different
materials is called the refractive index, and its symbol is n. The
refractive index, n, is equal to the ratio of the speed of light in a
vacuum to the speed of light in the material:
Learning tip
In any optical system, light rays will follow exactly the same path if
they are transmitted back from the end in the reverse direction. This
means the angles involved in refraction are the same whether the light
moves from the less dense medium into the more dense one, or vice
versa. Remember though, apart from rays along the normal line, the
angle to the normal will always be larger in the less dense medium.
WORKED EXAMPLE
What is the angle of refraction when a light ray passes from water
(n = 1.33) into glass (n2 = 1.50), hitting the interface between the
two at an angle of 48° to the normal?
n sind, = nysin
nsino
sin 82 =
12
sind
Whilst it is difficult to measure the underlying change in the speed,
at least for light waves, the effect on direction can be measured
easily. The relationship between direction and refractive index is
given by Snell's law:
nsin, = n2sin,
172
1.33 x sin 48°
-= 0.659
1.50
Az = sin-1 0.659
1. = 41.2°
5.3 Exam-style questions
1 Which of the following gives the correct values of the power of
a lens which has a focal length of 25 cm?
(a) P = 4D
(b) P = 25D
(c) P = 400D
(d) P= 400 D-1
[Total: 1]
[1]
(b) (i) The speed of blue light in the glass prism is
1.96 x 108ms-1
Calculate the refractive index of this glass for blue
light.
(ii) Calculate the critical angle for blue light in this glass
prism.
[2]
(c) The refractive index of this glass for red light is less than
for blue light. Add to the diagram to complete the path
of the red light through the prism. Label this path Y. [2]
[Total: 7]
2 What is the critical angle for Perspex which has a refractive
index of 1.48?
(a) 0.026°
(b) 0.74
(c) 42.5°
(d) 47.5°
[1]
[Total: 1)
6
3 Which of these is a correct expression of the lens formula?
+
If you look into a fish pond on a bright sunny day, you
sometimes cannot see the fish because of the glare of light
reflected off the surface. When the sunlight is reflected off the
surface of the water it is partially plane-polarised.
(a) State the difference between plane-polarised and
unpolarised light.
[1]
(b) Explain how Polaroid sunglasses can enable the fish to be
seen.
(c) State why sound waves cannot be polarised.
[1]
[Total: 5]
+
(c) f= 4 + V
(d) s=
[3]
[1]
[Total: 1]
4 Which of the following cannot be experimentally demonstrated
rated
with sound waves?
(a) Diffraction
(b) Polarisation
(c) Two source interference
(d) Ultrasound
[Total: 1]
(11
7 A student has four lenses with a focal length of 15.0 cm.
7
(a) (1) What is the power of one of these lenses?
[1]
(ii) What is the power of all four of these lenses placed in
combination so that light rays must pass through them
all?
[1]
(b) The student uses just one of the lenses in an experiment
to produce a real image on a screen from an illuminated
object. If the object is placed at a distance of 38.0 cm from
the lens, where must the screen be placed to observe a
clearly focused image?
[2]
(c) What is the magnification of the image?
[Total: 6]
5 Two parallel rays of light, one blue, one red, are travelling in air
and are incident on one side of a glass prism. The blue light
passes into the prism and meets the second face at the critical
angle as shown in the diagram.
[2]
red light
8 A student carries out an experiment to measure the refractive
index of glass. She does this by shining a ray of light through a
semicircular glass block and into the air as shown.
blue light
x - 30°
V – 48°
(a) Add to the diagram the path of the blue light after it meets
the second face. Label this path X.
[1]
186
TOPIC 5
Waves and the particle nature of light
CHAPTER
5.3 Optics
Introduction
Humans have long wondered at the appearance of rainbows and why fish appear to be larger underwater.
The development of understanding of the physics behind such natural phenomena has led us to be able to
develop more and more complex imaging techniques. A mobile telephone, lying on a desk, will soon be
projecting a cinema screen onto your bedroom wall. In some instances, understanding the physics has led
to immensely useful low-tech solutions. Spectacle lenses that can have their strength altered by filling a
plastic pouch with different amounts of water mean that glass lens grinding facilities are not needed, which
is very useful for remote or undeveloped societies.
This chapter will explain the details of refraction in different materials and how this leads to the
properties of different types of lenses. Lenses and combinations of lenses are used in many optical
instruments, such as telescopes and microscopes, and you will also see how these can produce a
clear image of an illuminated object.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the dioptre)
• Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. finding the power of a lens)
• Use of ratios and similar triangles (e.g. calculations with the magnification of an image)
• Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. using the lens formula)
Plotting two variables from experimental data (e.g. plotting a graph of experimental results of refraction
in glass)
• Determining the slope of a linear graph (e.g. using a graph of experimental results to find the refractive
index of glass)
• Identifying uncertainties in measurements and using simple techniques to determine uncertainty
(e.g. considering the uncertainty of experimental results in finding the refractive index of glass)
170
BIGGER
GLASS FORENSICS
WP
Refractive indices can be determined to several decimal places, and tiny variations can highlight very
subtle and small differences in the compositions of materials like glass.
In this activity, we will look at some ideas about identifying glass in crime scene investigations.
FORENSIC GLASS COMPARISON
Immersion methods are used to measure refractive index in some
laboratories. These methods take advantage of the fact that when
using monochromatic light, a particle immersed in a liquid of
identical refractive index will become invisible (Bloss 1961).
Introduction
Glass can be found in most localities. It is produced in a wide
variety of forms and compositions, and these affect the properties
of this material. It can occur as evidence when it is broken during
the commission of a crime. Broken glass fragments ranging in size
from large pieces to tiny shards may be transferred to and retained
by nearby persons or objects. The mere presence of fragments
of glass on the clothing of an alleged burglar in a case involving
entry through a broken window may be significant evidence if
fragments are found. The significance of such evidence will be
enhanced if the fragments are determined to be indistinguishable
in all measured properties from the broken window. On the other
hand, if the recovered fragments differ in their measured properties
from the glass from the broken window, then that window can
be eliminated as a possible source of the glass on the subject's
clothing (Koons et al. 2002).
+ Negative relief — No relief
- Positive relief
In this method, a video camera captures the image of the particle
edge, and a computer calculates the point of minimum contrast
- the match point - across the particle edge while automatically
varying the temperature. The temperature is adjusted so that
the refractive index of the liquid is higher than that of the glass
sample. The instrument lowers the temperature of the preparation
through the match point for the glass. The contrast between the
fragment and the liquid is monitored, and the match point is noted
automatically. The refractive index of the sample is calculated
automatically from temperature calibration data.
Interpretations/Conclusions
The variations of the properties of glass within a single source are
usually small (Bottrell et al. 2007), typically below the resolving
power of the techniques used to measure them. The variation
among glass objects from different sources can be observed
and measured (Hickman 1983; Koons et al. 1988; Koons and
Buscaglia 1999; Koons and Buscaglia 2002) and are usually much
greater than the variation within a single object.
1-1.434 -1.52 12-154 -16 11.-1.7 -18 11-195
fig A Crystals with differing refractive indices viewed within an oil bath with
refractive index, n = 1.54. Those with higher or lower refractive index are
easily visible, whereas the quartz with the same refractive index is virtually
invisible.
Optical Properties
Refractive index is a function of chemical composition and atomic
arrangement (Stoiber and Morse 1981). Refractive index is the
most commonly measured property in the forensic examination of
glass fragments (Koons et al. 2002), because:
• Precise refractive indices can be measured rapidly on the small
fragments typically found in casework.
. It can aid in the characterization of glass.
• It provides good discrimination potential. (Koons et al. 2002)
fig B A forensic lab refractometer.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
184
Optics
5.3
WP
colours through the second Polaroid. Changing the stresses on the
plastic will alter the internal stresses, and the interference pattern will
change. Engineers use this to see stress concentrations in models of
structures, and to observe how the stress concentrations change
when the amount of stress changes. This allows them to alter the
design to strengthen a structure in regions of highest stress.
Polarisation by chemical solutions
The analysis of stress concentrations investigated above
works because different parts of the plastic model have
different effects on polarised light. This is also the case with
some chemicals, such as sugar solution. The amount of the
concentration of the sugar solution varies the angle to which it
rotates the polarisation of the light. We can use Polaroid filters to
analyse the strength of the sugar solution, by measuring the angle
at which the light polarisation emerges after passing through the
solution.
fig D Engineering stress analysis using crossed Polaroids.
Polarisation by reflection and refraction
When unpolarised light reflects from a surface, such as a road, the
waves will become polarised. The degree of polarisation depends
on the angle of incidence, but it is always tending towards
horizontal plane polarisation, as shown in fig E.
unpolarised incident light
polarised reflected light
fig G Sugar solutions can rotate the plane of polarisation. The degree of
polarisation on a particular wavelength (colour) depends on the
concentration of the solution, and how far the light has had to pass
through it. This gives rise to the changing colours seen along the length
of this tube of sugar solution.
Questions
Silbab said that he had a 'sound wave polariser' on his new music
system. Explain why his claim is incorrect.
2 What does it mean to say that a wave is unpolarised?
3 Why do ski goggles often have Polaroid filters with a
vertical orientation?
WP
Explain the benefits of being able to use polarisation to
analyse stress concentrations in engineering models.
fig E Reflection can polarise waves.
Light waves incident on a surface into which they can refract (see
Section 5.3.1), such as a pond, will reflect partially horizontally
polarised light as in fig E, but will also transmit partially vertically
polarised light into the new medium, as in fig F.
unpolarised light
partially polarised light
Kev definition
Polarisation refers to the orientation of the plane of
oscillation of a transverse wave. If the wave is (plane) polarised,
all its oscillations occur in one single plane.
0.000
perpendicular to
plane of paper
air
glass
partially
polarised light
fig F Refraction can polarise waves.
183
Exam-style questions
5.3
(a) Calculate the refractive index from air to glasse
(b) (i) The student steadily increases the angle x in glass and
finds that eventually the light does not pass into the air.
Explain this observation.
31
(ii) Calculate the largest value of angle x that allows the
light to pass out of the block into the air.
[2]
[Total: 71
State what happens to this ray of light when it is incident
on the core-cladding boundary as shown.
[1]
(c) The light source for these curtains is at the top.
Suggest why the bottom of the curtain is much brighter
than the rest of the curtain.
[2]
[Total: 6]
9 Optical fibres have many uses in medicine and
communications. They can also be incorporated into items
such as the curtains shown in the photograph.
10 Rainbows are seen when sunlight is dispersed by raindrops.
The light is separated into different colours because they each
take different paths through raindrops.
A ray of white light is incident on a raindrop. The diagram
shows the subsequent path of the red light.
white
light
red light
raindrop
Some optical fibres are made from a central core of
transparent material surrounded by a material of a different
refractive index as a cladding.
red light
cladding
-core
core
cladding
cladding
speed of light in the core = 1.96 x 10ms!
speed of light in the cladding = 2.03 x 10ms-1
(a) Calculate the critical angle for the core-cladding
boundary.
(b) The diagram below shows a ray of light inside the core of a
fibre. The ray is incident on the core-cladding boundary at
an angle of 809.
(a) Name the effect that is experienced by the red light
at A.
[1]
(b) (i) On the diagram label an angle of incidence with an i
and an angle of refraction with an r.
[2]
(ii) On the diagram draw the path that a violet ray of
light would take, through the raindrop and into
the air.
(c) (i) State what is meant by the critical angle.
(ii) Calculate the critical angle for red light in the
raindrop
refractive index for red light in water = 1.3
[2]
(d) Red light has a frequency of 4.2 x 1014 Hz and travels at a
speed of 2.2 x 10% ms-1 in the raindrop.
Calculate the wavelength of the red light in the
raindrop
[Total: 10]
31
cladding
11 Explain how infrared radiation can travel the length of
an optical fibre, and describe and explain applications
of this.
[6]
[Total: 6]
core
core
cladding
187
Optics
5.3
As a diverging lens produces a virtual focus on the same side of the lens that the rays came from, the
focal length is recorded as a negative value.
For those lenses that are manufactured symmetrically in order to produce the focusing effect, the
light could be shone either way through them and suffer the same effects. This means that there is
a focal point on each side of the lens, both at the same focal length. You will see in Section 5.3.4
that this is also useful in image formation. For example, with a convex lens, a ray that hits the lens
parallel to the principal axis will change direction to pass through the focus. Alternatively, a ray hitting
the lens coming from the focus will change direction to emerge parallel to the principal axis. The
simplest ray journey is for a ray that hits the exact centre of a lens. Regardless of its approach angle,
it will pass through the lens undeviated, i.e. it continues in a straight line as if the lens were not there.
Power of a lens
The distance from a lens to its focus is a measure of the strength of a lens. More powerful lenses
bring the light rays together in a shorter distance - they have a shorter focal length. The power can
be calculated if we know the focal length:
Power (dioptres, D) =
focal length (metres, m)
P=
As a diverging lens has a negative focal length, its power will be recorded as a negative value.
WORKED EXAMPLES
A lens for a telescope has a focal length of 46 cm. What is its power?
Pal
f = 46 cm = 0.46 m
P0.46
P-
1
P = 2.17 D
A concave lens for spectacles has a virtual focus at a distance of 36.4 cm from the centre of the lens.
What is its power?
pun
f = -36.4 cm = -0.364 m
-0.364
P = -2.75D
F focal
point
focal length
fig C Fatter convex lenses generally have a shorter focal length - they are more powerful.
If twin lenses are placed one after the other in combination, the overall power of the combination is
equal to the sum of the individual powers of the lenses:
P= P + P + P + ...
177
5.
33
Investigation
WP
Investigating the power of lenses
A distant object outside a window will provide parallel rays of light. If we focus an image of this object on
a screen, we can easily measure the distance between lens and screen, the focal length.
LIL
fig D The 'window test provides a quick and easy method to measure the focal length of a converging lens.
By carefully recording the focal length, f. of the lens, we can calculate its power:
PE
Questions
What is meant by the term focal length?
2 Measure the focal lengths of the two lenses as shown in fig A, and calculate the power of each.
3
Explain why the window test is not an appropriate way to find the power of a diverging lens.
4
You have a convex lens and a concave lens. Both have focal points 5 cm from the lens. They are placed in
line exactly 10cm apart, as shown in fig E.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 10 cm
fig E A pair of opposite effect lenses.
On a copy of fig E, to scale, draw a ray diagram showing the path of parallel light rays that arrive from the
left of the diagram hitting the convex lens.
5
If the two lenses in the worked example calculations on the previous page are used in combinations, what
is their overall power?
Key definitions
Convex lenses converge parallel rays to a focus, at the focal length from the lens.
Concave lenses diverge parallel rays to appear to have come from a virtual focus, at the focal length back
from the lens.
A converging lens will bring light rays closer together.
The focus, or focal point, of a lens is the point where rays incident on the lens and parallel to the principal
axis will be made to meet by the refraction of the lens.
A diverging lens will spread light rays further apart.
A virtual focus of a diverging lens is the point where rays incident on the lens and parallel to the principal
axis will appear to have come from on emergence from the lens.
The focal length is the distance from the centre of a lens to its focal point.
178
