5.2
Investigation
Investigating two-source interference
fig C Two-source interference demonstration in a ripple tank.
A ripple tank where plane waves are diffracted through two gaps will cause an interference pattern
between the two water waves.
Another common experimental demonstration of two-slit interference is with laser light.
laser
screen
wwwwwww
double slit
bright spots
fig D Two-slit interference demonstration with a laser.
Learning tip
Two-source interference and two-slit interference are the same thing. In both cases, two waves are
brought together to produce an interference pattern. Two-slit interference is a form of two-source
interference, where the slits diffract existing waves in order to act as new sources of waves.
Explaining two-source interference
fig E Different distances from each slit to point X determine the resultant amplitude of the standing wave at X.
Each point in a two-source interference pattern will have a superposition result that depends on the
phase difference between the waves coming from each source to that point. That phase difference
will, in turn, depend on the relative distances to the point from each of the slits compared with the
wavelength. In fig E, imagine the distance from the slit to X along the blue line is 100 wavelengths,
and the distance along the red line is 115 wavelengths. As the path difference is exactly 15
wavelengths, the waves will be in phase at point X, and will constructively interfere, to produce a
maximum resultant, as in an antinode. If we passed laser light through the two slits, then point X
would show a bright spot on a screen placed there.
164
5.2
2
mode
wavelength
fundamental
(1st harmonic)
node
node
node
antinode X
antinode
1st overtone
(2nd harmonic)
2nd overtone
(3rd harmonic)
WN
MN
3rd overtone
(4th harmonic)
.
fig C As the string is fixed at each end, these end points must always be nodes. The standing wave can only occur if its
wavelength exactly allows a node at each end.
WORKED EXAMPLE
A guitar string of length 65 cm vibrates in its fundamental mode. The speed of waves in the string is
362ms-l. What are the wavelength and frequency of this standing wave?
A = 2L = 2 x 0.65
A = 1.30 m
f=V-V
2L
F-362
- 1.30
f = 278 Hz
String wave speeds
Waves on a stretched spring travel at a speed that is affected by the tension in the string, 7 (in
newtons) and the mass per unit length of the string, u (in kg m ). The equation for the speed of a
wave in a string is:
If this equation is combined with the wave equation, we get an equation that tells us how the
frequency of string vibrations is affected by other factors:
v=VH and v=f*1
In the fundamental mode of vibration, this means the fundamental frequency. fo. depends on the
length of the string, its tension and its mass per unit length from:
fo= al Vü
158
Stationary waves
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain what is meant by coherent waves
explain how a standing/stationary wave forms and identify
nodes and antinodes
displacement
Www
AN
M
distance
.
use the equation for the speed of transverse waves on a string
verify experimentally what factors affect the frequency of
standing waves on a string
W
displacement
www
.
distance
.
displacement
distance
Standing waves
Continuous waves travelling in opposite directions will superpose
continuously, and this can set up a stationary wave pattern, also
known as a standing wave. The waves need to be of the same
speed and frequency, with similar amplitudes, and have a constant
phase relationship. Waves with the same frequency and a constant
phase relationship are said to be coherent.
Stationary waves are so called as the profile of the wave does not
move along, it only oscillates. This also means that wave energy
does not pass along a standing wave; as such they do not meet
our strict definition of waves, which do transfer energy and are
more precisely called progressive waves. A situation such as
that in fig B can be set up when waves travel along a string and
are reflected from a fixed end, which is how the wave in fig A
was produced. In this situation, such as when a guitar string is
plucked, the first wave will meet its own reflection, and these two
coherent waves set up a standing wave on the string. There are
points where the resultant displacement is always zero. These
points never move, and are called nodes. Conversely, the points
of maximum amplitude are called antinodes. Note that all points
between one node and the next are in the same phase at all times,
although their amplitude of vibration varies up to the antinode
and back to zero at the next node.
displacement
w
distance
displacement
N
distance
fig B As coherent waves pass through each other, the resultant wave will be
stationary
Depending on the frequency of the wave that produces the
stationary wave by constructively interacting with its own
reflection, the standing wave pattern that can be set up will
have a corresponding wavelength, as the wave equation must
still be satisfied. For example, in fig C, the first overtone exactly
fits one complete wave in the length of the string: 1 = L. In the
third overtone, there are two complete waves in length L, so the
wavelength is halved. The speed of waves on the string is the
same in both situations, so the frequency in the third overtone
must be double that of the first overtone. If a string is plucked
and allowed to vibrate freely, all modes of vibration will be
present at the same time, but the fundamental will be the
most significant
fig A When coherent waves meet, a stationary wave is set up with points of
zero amplitude (nodes) and points of maximum amplitude (antinodes).
This can be demonstrated in the school laboratory with a vibration
generator and a rubber cord.
157
Wave interference
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand what is meant by the terms coherence, path difference and interference
interpret the relationship between phase difference and path difference
explain examples of wave interference
Two-source interference
In Section 5.2.2 we saw that a wave meeting its own reflection would set up a standing wave pattern,
also known as an interference pattern. Reflection is a convenient way to generate coherent waves
that will produce a standing wave. However, any combination of waves that have the same frequency
and a constant phase relationship will produce this result. For example, in fig A, the loudspeakers
are connected to the same signal generator, so they simultaneously produce identical sound waves.
Wherever the sound waves meet, they will superpose to produce a resultant displacement of air
molecules. This means there will be points of maximum amplitude - antinodes - such as at position
X, or points of zero amplitude - nodes - where there will be silence, such as position Y. The relative
positions of nodes and antinodes will depend on the distance from the speakers, their separation and
the wavelength of the waves.
position X
loudspeakers
position Y
sound waves
fig A Two loudspeakers generating the same frequency sounds.
Two-slit interference
Another interference pattern can be observed if light is shone into an experimental set-up that
WP
causes it to create two coherent wave sources that produce a standing wave pattern. This effect
was first demonstrated by Thomas Young in 1803, using sunlight as the light source. A simple
laboratory set-up using a torch, similar to that shown in fig B, would show a pattern of dark and light
fringes that resembles the nodes and antinodes in a standing light wave.
Young explained his experiment using a theory that light behaves as a wave. In classical physics,
interference is a phenomenon that can only occur with waves. Young's theory was highly
controversial at the time, as he was contradicting Newton's theory that light behaved as a stream of
particles. Despite the experimental evidence he demonstrated, most scientists at the time refused to
believe Young's wave theory of light.
fig B Two-slit interference of torch
light. An interference pattern
of dark and light fringes is seen
on the screen.
163
The behaviour of waves
5.2
two transverse waves
Wavefronts
Diagrams of waves are often drawn as lines, as in fig B, where
all the points on a line represent points on the wave that are at
exactly the same phase position, perhaps a wave crest. These lines
are called wavefronts. They are how the sea might look observed
from a helicopter, where the troughs are all in shadow and so
appear darker.
wavefront - all
The waves are
points at a wave peak
travelling in this
where phase = 90°
direction.
I
11
A
+ B
fig B All points on each wavefront (black lines) are in the same phase position:
90", or 7/2. The green line showing direction of travel is called a ray.
Rays must be perpendicular to wavefronts.
fig D Wave pulse displacements add when they meet in the same location.
Wave superposition
When waves meet, each wave will be trying to cause a wave
displacement at the point of intersection, according to its phase
at that location. The net effect is that the overall displacement will
be the vector sum of the displacements caused by the individual
waves. After the encounter, each wave will continue past each other,
as the energy progresses in the same direction it was originally
travelling. This can be most simply illustrated if we consider just
wave pulses passing each other, as in fig C.
If the wave pulses in fig D are travelling on the surface of water,
then each would be trying to displace the water molecules
upwards briefly as it passed. When both meet at the same
location, wave pulse A lifts the water a little, and then pulse B is
also lifting up, so the water raises even higher - to the level of the
two pulse displacements added together. This effect is thought
to explain the tales from returning sailors that they saw a sudden
freak wave which then vanished as quickly as it had appeared. The
sum of many waves, travelling in many different directions, which
happen to coincide at a point at one instant, could cause a huge
instantaneous displacement, which then drops again as the waves
continue on their way.
20
Surface elevation/m
-100
200
1200
200 400 600 800 1000
Time/s
fig E Multiple small waves coinciding in the same location can lead
to a brief very large displacement. This graph is of sea surface
height at the Draupner North Sea Oil Platform on 1st January
1995, showing a freak 18 m wave,
WP
fig C When waves meet, the displacements would add to each other to give
the overall displacement for each location.
155
The behaviour of waves
5.2
at interference in the next section, but the diffraction patterns we have seen with a laser are examples
of an interference pattern. Considering the waves being diffracted from each end of the slit, gives us
two waves that will meet at the screen. We saw in Section 5.2.1 that if waves meet in phase they will
superpose to give a larger amplitude resultant wave. This would appear as a light spot on the screen.
At a slightly different place on the screen, these two waves will be completely out of phase and the
sum of their displacements will always be zero, so it appears as a dark spot. The diffraction pattern is
an example of a standing wave on the screen, where the dark spots are nodes and the light spots are
antinodes.
Single slit diffraction
If we change the width of the diffraction slit, we will alter the diffraction pattern that we observe.
A narrower slit widens the central maximum, as well as the further maxima and minima.
fig E Diffraction patterns of light observed on a screen show a bright, wide central maximum, surrounded by areas of
darkness, and further bright spots that have decreasing brightness from the centre.
The diffraction grating
A diffraction grating is a device that will cause multiple diffraction patterns, which then overlap.
creating an interference pattern with a mathematically well-defined spacing between bright and dark
spots. It is a collection of a very large number of slits through which the waves can pass. These slits
are parallel and have a fixed distance between each slit.
Learning tin
The grating spacing is often
quoted as a number of lines
per metre (or per millimetre).
which means that to find d you
will need to do an initial
calculation in which:
fig F Diffraction gratings can be used to examine light spectra.
The pattern produced by each colour passing through a diffraction grating follows the equation:
na = dsino
where is the angle between the original direction of the waves and the direction of a bright spot,
is the wavelength of the light used, d is the spacing between the slits on the grating, and n is called
the 'order'. The order is the bright spot number from the central maximum (which is n = 0).
number per metre
OR:
1 x 10-3
d=-
number per millimetre
161
5.
23
Questions
Investigation
Investigating diffraction with a laser
You can use a laser pointer or laboratory experimental laser to
demonstrate diffraction. A diffraction grating investigation allows
careful study of the light making up the spectrum from any light
source. Astronomers use this to study the spectra from stars.
1 In stormy seas, a yachtsman thought it would be a good idea to
position his boat behind a large oil tanker to avoid being battered
by the waves that were coming from the other side of the tanker.
Explain why this plan might not help.
2
diffraction
grafting
central bright spot
(a) Explain why the radio waves from the two dishes in fig I spread
out differently in each case.
(b) Suggest examples in which each situation in fig I might be
useful for different purposes.
transmitter dish same size
as wavelength
waves spead
out as they
travel
laser
L
1st order
2nd order
3rd order
wavefronts of microwaves
wwwwwwwwwwwww
screen
waves stay in
a beam
as they travel
dish larger than wavelength
figi The size of a radio transmitter can be important depending on
its purpose.
3
fig G A diffraction grating will produce a series of bright spots at increasing
angles from the centre.
Diffraction gratings are manufactured to have a fixed spacing, d,
between lines on the grating, and this will be printed on the grating.
By measuring the angle to each maximum brightness spot created by
a diffraction grating, you can calculate the wavelength of the light
used from the diffraction grating equation.
In an experiment to examine the colours of light produced by hot
helium gas, a chemist used a diffraction grating, and found the first
order maximum for each of three colours were at angles of 26.6°,
30.1 and 36.0°. If the grating she used had 1000 lines per mm, what
were the wavelengths for these three colours?
90° is the maximum angle through which a maximum produced
by a diffraction grating could be observed, but we can only
observe a maximum for which n is an integer. For the experiment
in question 3, calculate how many orders would be observed for
each of the three colours.
fig H CDs have a series of very close lines marked on them and act as a
diffraction grating that reflects. This causes the spectrum of colours that
can be seen on them from white light that hits the surface.
162
5.2
Superposition of continuous waves
If, rather than a single point along the path of the waves, we consider waves superposing over an
extended space, the outcome is a continuous wave that is the sum of the displacements over time
in each location. If the two waves are in phase, their effect will be to produce a larger-amplitude
resultant wave. This is known as constructive interference. If identical waves meet and are exactly
out of phase - if their phase difference is 180° or a radians - then the resultant is a zero-amplitude
wave. This idea of complete destructive interference can be confusing: imagine shining two
beams of light to the same place, and at that point you see blackness. In the right circumstances, as
explained in Section 5.2.4, this is exactly what happens.
It is important to know the phase difference between two waves, in order to determine what will
happen as a result of their superposition. Waves that constructively interfere, as with the top pair in
fig F. must be in phase, which means they have a phase difference of zero. As phase repeats every
complete cycle, this could also be said to be a phase difference of 360° or 27 radians.
m
.
fig F Constructive and destructive
interference.
Questions
What is the difference between a ray and a wavefront?
2 What is the phase difference between waves that completely destructively interfere?
Imagine waves on the surface of the sea. What are the phase differences between:
(a) two wave crests
(b) a crest and the next trough
(c) a trough and the crest three waves in front?
On graph paper, draw three diagrams of the wave pulses shown in fig G, at time = 1.0 s, 2.0s and 3.0 s if fig G is
at time = 0. Superpose the wave pulses as necessary to draw the correct overall displacements of the string.
-4.0 cm
3.0 cm
v = 2.0 cms-1
7.0 cm
4.0 cm
v = 2.0 cms-1
+
4.0 cm
fig G Two wave pulses moving along a string.
Key definitions
Wavefronts are lines connecting points on the wave that are at exactly the same phase position.
Constructive interference is the superposition effect of two waves that are in phase, producing a larger
amplitude resultant wave.
Destructive interference is the superposition effect of two waves that are out of phase, producing a
smaller amplitude resultant wave.
156
TOPIC 5
Waves and the particle nature of light
CHAPTER
5.2
The behaviour of
waves
Introduction
Some of the most intriguing and beautiful phenomena are the product of two or more waves combining
their effects together. It is perhaps surprising that waves can pass through each other, creating some
spectacular effects, and then continue on their way as if they had never met.
We will look at the ways in which different waves will combine together, along with the reasons why they
might not, and learn how to predict and measure the outcomes of these combinations. The production of
stationary wave patterns can be counter-intuitive, but it is the fundamental basis for the functioning of
musical instruments. The variety and beauty of musical instruments, along with the variation in the sounds
they produce, is all a product of their need to generate a stationary wave by combining multiple wave
movements together.
WP
Diffraction and interference can be explained with some relatively simple mathematical ideas.
When these relationships are repeated over and over again, in different places, it can lead not only
to striking sights such as the rainbow reflected from an oily puddle, but also to the limits of
scientific knowledge, such as the discovery that the Universe is expanding.
All the maths you need
Units of measurement (e.g. the radian, rad)
Translating information between graphical, numerical and algebraic forms (e.g. superposing wave
displacements to discover a standing wave)
Understanding the relationship between degrees and radians and translating from one to the other
(e.g. comparing the phase relationship between waves)
Plotting two variables from experimental data, and understanding that y = mx + C represents a linear
relationship (e.g. using a graph of experimental results to verify the standing wave properties in a string
under tension)
• Solving algebraic equations (e.g. comparing the positions of interference maxima and minima)
Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. finding the speed of waves in a string under
tension)
152
BIGGER
THE MARIMBA
WP
The marimba is a percussion instrument like a xylophone. Its wooden bars vibrate with frequencies
related to their sizes, as a standing wave is set up in the wood when it is struck with a mallet.
In this activity, we will look at some of the detail about tuning the marimba bars.
THE MARIMBA BAR
to sound at different frequencies. Sensitivity in the bass region is much
less than in the range around 1000 to 4000 Hz. In order to partially
overcome this problem, the bass bars are designed with wider width
so that they generate sound at a higher energy level.
The marimba bar vibrates in complex patterns that produce a
sound uniquely characteristic to the instrument. An understanding
of the sound quality (timbre) is gained by study of the vibrations.
Each type of vibration is called a mode of vibration. In a scientific
study of a C3 (C below middle C) marimba bar, Bork et al. (1999)
identified 25 modes of vibration in the range of 0 to 8000 Hz.
third torsional mode
fig C C-note Marimba bars from five octaves.
fig A When the bar vibrates, the salt sprinkled all over it moves away from
antinodes, leaving a pattern which identifies how the wood is vibrating.
In this example, the bar is vibrating in a torsional mode, as well as the
standard transverse vibration.
The graph below depicts the threshold of human hearing at different
frequencies. Note that the human ear is most sensitive to frequencies
in the range of 1000 to 4000 Hz. The energy level of the sound is
graphed in decibels (dB), which is logarithmic. An increase of 10 dB
represents a 10-fold increase in sound energy and an increase of
20 dB represents a 100-fold increase in sound energy.
Drilling the Holes for the Bar - Finding the Nodes of the
Fundamental Mode
Sprinkle some salt on the bar and then tap very lightly with
a mallet at the centre of the bar. Keep tapping until the salt
accumulates over each node as illustrated below.
w
Www
wwwww
Sound pressure level (dB)
fig B Finding the nodes on a marimba bar, for the positions of mounting screws.
Human Hearing at Different Frequencies and the Graduation
of Bar Width
You will note that marimba bars are graduated in width, growing
wider with lower notes. One of the challenges in designing an
instrument which sounds in the bass region is to provide tones that can
be easily heard. The human ear has a remarkable range of sensitivity
2015, c, C C C C C C C C
15.6 31.2 62.5 125 250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000 16000
Frequency (Hz)
fig D As the frequency of sound decreases, it must be played louder for us to
hear it.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
166
The behaviour of waves
5.2
Alternatively, imagine the blue line distance to X is 97 wavelengths but the red line distance is 98.5
wavelengths. The path difference is 1.5 wavelengths. In this case, the waves will always be 37 radians
out of phase - always in antiphase - and so will always cancel. This would look like a standing wave
node, and if it were the laser light two-slit experiment, there would be a dark spot at point X.
Note that these wavelength numbers are examples only. As light waves are so short, the numbers
should be millions of wavelengths for standard laboratory distances for X.
destructive
interference
constructive
interference
Am
fig F All points that are exactly in phase, where the path difference is a whole number of wavelengths, nx, will produce
w (2n+1)
constructive interference. Any points where the path difference is given by will cause destructive interference.
The connection between the phase difference and the path difference comes if we remember that
each complete cycle (or wavelength) corresponds to 27 radians in phase. Waves from one slit
meeting waves from the other slit at a point will each have had to travel to that point, cycling through
wavelengths as they go. Thus, by comparing the path difference, this can be converted into phase
differences.
Points where the path difference is equal to ni exactly will have a phase difference of 2nt exactly
and will be in phase, producing constructive interference.
(2n + 1)
Points where the path difference is equal to
exactly, will have a phase difference of
(2n + 1) T exactly and will be in antiphase, producing destructive interference.
Questions
What are coherent waves?
In a laser light two-slit interference experiment, a bright fringe was observed at a point on the screen
exactly halfway between the two slits. A dark fringe was observed on either side of this, and then another
bright fringe on either side.
(a) What is the phase difference between the waves arriving from each slit at the central maximum?
(b) What is the path difference, and the phase difference, between waves arriving from each slit to the
first minimum on the left of the central maximum?
(c) What is the path difference, and the phase difference, between the waves arriving from each slit at the
first maximum to the left of the central maximum?
(d) Describe what difference would be observed in the fringe pattern if the screen were moved further
away from the two slits.
Key definitions
Interference is the superposition outcome of a combination of waves. An interference pattern will
only be observed under certain conditions, such as the waves being coherent.
Coherent waves must have
• the same frequency
• a constant phase relationship.
165
Thinking Bigger
5.2
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the webpage.
1. The extract opposite is from a webpage explaining the complex physics of the vibrations
and sounds produced by a marimba. This is a hobby interest of the author who is a
scientist in a teaching university (as opposed to a research-based university). Consider
the extract and comment on the type of writing that is used. Try and answer the
following questions:
a. Discuss the level of the science presented in the extract. Who might gain some
useful insight from reading this webpage?
b. Comment on the fact that this webpage runs to several thousand words, has many
images and diagrams relating to the science of stationary waves, but there is no picture
of a complete Marimba instrument on it.
c. What is meant by the phrase 'Bork et al. (1999)?
On this page we only
have an extract: you may
find it helpful to visit the
webpage and see all the
different sections that it
covers in their entirety.
Now we will look at the physics in detail. Some of these questions will link to topics earlier in
this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different areas of physics to work out the
answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put this work in context with what
you have already learned in your course.
2. Explain why the salt collects in the two places shown in fig B. Why would these be the
best points to place the mounting screws for the bar?
3. What is the connection between frequency of the C-notes and the octave they are in?
4. Looking at fig C, estimate the ratios of the surface area of the bars. Compare these
answers with the decibel values for each needed to hear each note on the graph in fig D.
Why might these be linked?
108503706708800
Activity
Write a report to a school Design and Technology department which explains how they could make
marimba bars in lessons. Include some of the physics behind what will alter their sound properties, and
include outline plans for manufacture by school students. Also include instructions for experimentally
testing the frequency of each bar produced. Your report should be written for the teacher in charge of the
subject, whilst their lessons will be for GCSE students.
Think about how the
vibrations of the bar will
generate sound waves.
By Jeffrey La Favre, from the article Tuning the Marimba Bar and Resonator on his website,
http://lafavre.us/tuning-marimba.htm. Copyright Jeffrey La Favre, used with his permission.
4.1
4.2
5.1
52 YOU ARE 53
5.2 HERE
5.4
167
What have I studied before?
• Definitions of the properties of waves, such as
frequency, amplitude, wavelength and speed
The definition of wave phase, and its relationship
to frequency and time period
The difference between, and examples of,
transverse and longitudinal waves
The transmission of waves, and graphical
representations of them
Calculations of wave properties
What will I study later?
Effects on the properties and movement of a
wave due to changes in its medium
Interference and diffraction of fast-moving
particles such as electrons
The use of diffraction in studying the spectra of
stars (A level)
The connections between waves and simple
harmonic motion (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
How waves can combine when they meet
The development of standing waves, and what
affects their properties
Diffraction and interference
Applications of standing wave patterns, such as
the interference or diffraction of light, and the
development of musical instruments
-153
52
Wave phase and superposition
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand what is meant by the terms wavefront, superposition and phase
explain examples of wave superposition
Phase
All points in a wave will be at some position through their cycle of oscillation. Some of these
positions in the cycle have their own names, such as peak (or crest), trough, compression or
rarefaction. The remaining points through a cycle are important, but there are too many to give
them all names. We describe any position through a cycle by a number, referred to as the phase.
A complete cycle is considered to be equivalent to rotating through a complete circle, so the phase
position will be an angle measurement, where a complete cycle is equivalent to 360°.
phase angle
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
AN
-
-
-
-
phase angle
-
-
-
0
1800A
360°
L
90°
180°
270°
310° /360°
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
310°
270°
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
fig A Wave phase represents the position through a complete cycle, measured in angle units.
It is quite common to measure phase in the alternative angle units of radians, where one complete
cycle is 2 trad. Table A shows common phase positions in the two equivalent angle units, along with
the fraction of a complete wavelength that they represent. As waves are, by definition, a repetitive
cyclic process, phases of more than 360° could be reduced to their equivalent value within a first
cycle. For example, the wave peak after 1.25 cycles has exactly the same phase as the wave peak in
the first cycle, so its phase could be quoted as either 450° or 90°
Start
Wave cycle
position
Start
of a
of a
of a
cycle
A whole
cycle
1.5
cycles
2 complete
cycles
cycle
cycle
Phase/
90
180
270
360
5 40
720
Phase/rad
27
3TT
4T
Number of
wavelengths
0
31
1.5A
table A Phase angles in degrees and radians, and also compared to wavelengths.
154
5.2 Exam-style questions
1 What is the wavelength of the fundamental standing wave on a
guitar string that is 74 cm long?
(a) A = 0.37m
(b) A = 0.74 m
(c) A = 1.48 m
(d) A = 2.96 m
[1]
[Total: 1]
5 When oil floats on water, coloured interference patterns are
often seen. The interference patterns are formed because of the
thin film of oil. A thin film of oil can also produce interference
patterns with monochromatic light. The diagram shows light
from a monochromatic source, incident on a film of oil.
Explain why interference patterns may be seen.
WWWWW
air
1
oil
2 Which of the following is not caused by wave superposition:
(a) The fundamental note produced on a guitar string.
(b) Seismic P-waves cause surface damage before S-waves.
(c) Occasionally a theatre seat can be in a 'dead zone' where
little can be heard from the stage.
(d) CDs can have a rainbow appearance.
Dan.)
water
[1]
[Total: 5]
[Total: 1
3 Which of these correctly represents the same phase position in
different units?
(a) 90' and Trad
(b) 180º and Trad
(c) 360° and
(d) 180° and 27 rad
[Total: 1]
6 In a school experiment, a laser is shone at right angles onto a
diffraction grating to produce a pattern of light and dark spots
on a screen several metres away. The grating is marked
*500 lines/mm'.
(a) What is the distance between slits on the diffraction
grating?
[1]
(b) If the first bright spot from the centre is found to be at an
angle of 15° from the original direction of the laser beam,
what is the wavelength of the light?
[2]
(c) The laser is changed for a different one which has a
wavelength of 450 nm. How many orders of bright spot will
be generated by the diffraction grating?
[3]
[Total: 6]
[1]
4 A sonic tape measure uses ultrasound to measure distances in
buildings. It sends out pulses of ultrasound towards a distant
wall and records the time interval between a pulse being sent
and its return.
sonic tape
measure
(a) For one particular measurement the time interval
was 25 ms.
Calculate the distance from the sonic tape measure
to the wall.
Speed of sound = 330 m s-1
[3]
(b) Why is the ultrasound transmitted in pulses?
[Total: 4]
[1]
168
Exam-style questions
5.2
7 (a) A transverse wave travelling along a wire under tension has
a speed v given by
v=vi
8 (a) State what is meant by diffraction.
(b) State the principle of superposition of waves.
(c) The photograph shows a beach in England. Waves can be
seen passing rocks on their way to the beach. The uneven
surface of the sand has formed as a result of diffraction
and superposition of these waves.
where T'is the tension in the wire and u is the mass per
unit length of the wire.
Show that the units on both sides of the equation are the
same.
[3]
(b) The diagram shows a wire held under tension by hanging
weights at one end and supported by a vibration generator
at the other end. The frequency of the vibration generator
is slowly increased from zero until a standing wave is
formed
-2.0m-
vibration
generator
weights
(d) Use the ideas of diffraction and superposition to explain
why the sand surface becomes uneven.
[Total: 9)
[5]
(i) Explain how the standing wave is produced. [3]
(ii) Calculate the wavelength of the standing wave. [1]
(iii) The weight is 150 N and the mass per unit length of
the wire is 0.0050 kg m-?.
Using the equation given in (a), calculate the speed of
the transverse wave along the wire.
[2]
(iv) The wire is observed as the frequency of the vibration
generator is steadily increased to several times the
frequency that produced the first standing wave.
Describe and explain what is seen as the frequency is
increased
[Total: 13]
169
The behaviour of waves
5.2
WORKED EXAMPLE
Questions
How fast do waves travel in a string that is held under 75 N tension
and has a mass per unit length of 5.0 x 10-4kg m-l? What would be
its fundamental frequency if the string was 75.5 cm long?
A guitar string of length 75 cm vibrates in its second harmonic.
The speed of waves in the string is 420ms! What are the
wavelength and frequency of this standing wave?
75
V
=
15 10-4
V = 387 ms-1
1T
2 (a) How fast do waves travel in a string that is held under 90 N
tension and has a mass per unit length of 4.8 x 10-4 kg m-"?
(b) What would be the waves' fundamental frequency if the string
was 74.0 cm long?
fo= L V
f
1
75
fo = 2 x 0.755 15 x 10-4
fo= 256 Hz
WP
Investigation
Investigating the factors affecting the fundamental frequency
of a string
We can verify the equation for experimentally. In order to
confirm it, we need to undertake three separate investigations to
verify each part of the relationship, whilst maintaining the other
variables as control variables. Thus we need to verify: fo fo VT;
and fova
A sonometer experiment produced the following data (table A).
Draw a suitable graph to find out what the mass per unit length of
the vibrating string was.
Length/m
Frequency/Hz
0.60
190
0.65
180
0.70
165
0.75
150
0.80
140
0.85
135
0.90
| 130
0.95
| 120
1.00
Tee
115
String
table A Data from a sonometer experiment.
The hanging mass used was 2.4 kg : T = 23.5 N.
4 Estimate the mass per unit length of piano wire.
-hanging masses
fig D Sonometer experiments to verify the factors affecting the fundamental
frequency of a stretched string.
We can use a microphone connected to an oscilloscope to monitor the
sounds produced by a sonometer string and to measure its frequency
of vibration. This can be easier if a datalogging computer is used instead
of an oscilloscope, so the screen can be frozen for close scrutiny.
1 The string supports (called bridges) on a sonometer are
moveable, so that we can find the frequency with varying lengths,
L, whilst the same string (constant p) and the same hanging mass
(constant T) keep the other variables controlled. We can plot a
graph to verify fo on the y-axis is proportional to 1/L on the x-axis.
2 We can find the fundamental frequency using a fixed length of
the same string throughout (constant Land constant u) for
varying masses hung over the pulley, i.e. varying T. We can plot a
graph to verify fo on the y-axis is proportional to VT on the x-axis.
3 The final experiment requires a set of different strings (varying
diameter metal wires could be used). Maintaining the same
length and the same hanging mass (constant Land T) keeps the
other variables controlled. Measure the mass of each wire using a
digital balance, and its full length, in order to calculate the mass
per unit length for each wire or string used. We can plot a graph
to verify fo on the y-axis is proportional to on the x-axis.
Key definitions
A stationary or standing wave consists of oscillations in a fixed
space, with regions of significant oscillation and regions with zero
oscillation, which remain in the same locations at all times.
Waves are said to be coherent if they have the same frequency and
have a constant phase relationship. Coherent waves are needed to
form a stable standing wave.
A progressive wave is a means for transferring energy via
oscillations.
Nodes are regions on a stationary wave where the amplitude of
oscillation is zero.
Antinodes are regions on a stationary wave where the amplitude of
oscillation is at its maximum.
A sonometer is an apparatus for experimenting with the frequency
relationships of a string under tension, usually consisting of a
horizontal wooden sounding box and a metal wire stretched along
the top of the box.
159
5.
23
Diffraction
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand what is meant by the term diffraction
understand the factors that affect the amount of diffraction
describe an experiment to observe diffraction effects
fig C Water waves in a ripple tank diffract obviously when passed through a gap.
Factors affecting diffraction
The amount of diffraction around an obstacle depends on the
size comparison between the obstacle and the wavelength of
the wave. As the resulting diffraction through a gap is caused
by the diffraction at each end of the gap, there is an optimum
size for maximum diffraction, or spreading, through the gap.
Diffraction happens most when the gap size is the same size as
the wavelength.
fig A Diffraction is a spreading of wave energy through a gap or around an
obstacle.
Diffraction
When a wave passes the edge of an obstacle, the wave energy
spreads into the space behind the obstacle. If the obstacle is
relatively small, this can mean that the wave energy will pass around
both sides of it and continue travelling past the obstacle, with no
shadow, as if the obstacle were not there, as shown in fig B.
direction of
wave travel
fig D The amount of diffraction depends on the size of the gap relative to the
wavelength.
If the gap is too small, very little wave energy can pass through.
If the gap is very large, there is little effect as the majority of the
wave passes through undisturbed. However, when the wavelength
matches the gap size, the wave energy is spread very effectively
through the gap to fill the space behind, as shown in fig D. This
is why we can hear around corners, but not see around them.
The typical wavelength for an audible sound ranges from tens
of centimetres to a couple of metres, depending on the exact
frequency. These are the same sort of size as potential diffracting
obstacles. For example, a doorway might be a metre wide, and a
sound of this wavelength would have a frequency around 330 Hz,
which is a typical speech frequency for humans. This means that
a conversation in a room could be heard in the corridor outside
the door, as the waves diffract from their original direction through
the doorway to be heard out of line of sight. However, with typical
visible frequencies of light being of the order of 10-metres, these
will not diffract perceptibly through the doorway. So light from the
speakers will only be visible in direct line of sight through the gap.
www
rock
fig B Wave energy spreads behind an obstacle.
If the obstacle is larger, then there may be a shadow region behind
it, but there will still be diffraction around each edge. If there are
two close obstacles forming a gap, then there will be diffraction
from each edge of the gap, causing the waves to spread out
through the gap. Also see Section 5.4.1 for an explanation of why
diffraction occurs.
160
Diffraction patterns
The diffraction pattern observed when light passes through a
narrow slit, such as in fig E, shows a central maximum and then
areas of darkness and further maxima of decreasing intensity. It
can be confusing to see the areas where there is no light at all,
when the diffraction through a gap suggests that the wave energy
spreads out behind the gap. You might expect to see the screen
behind the slit illuminated everywhere. We will look more carefully
