Quantum physics
5.4
Intensity of radiation
When a lamp emits light, we could measure its intensity. This is the amount of energy it carries, per
unit area, and per unit time. Power is the rate of transfer of energy, so this becomes:
21 power (W)
intensity (Wm-2) =
area (m2)
TED
WORKED EXAMPLE
On a particular day, sunlight lands on Earth with an intensity of 960 Wm? What is the power received
by the solar cell on a calculator placed in this sunlight, if the cell is a rectangle 1 cm by 4 cm?
.:
P = / A
=960 x 0.01 0.04
P = 0.38 W
— level A
Questions
632.8 nm wavelength
laser light emission
What is the wavelength of light emitted when an excited hydrogen electron falls from energy level n = 2
down to its ground state?
level B
-
-
Why couldn't a photon of light with an energy of 1.43 x 10-18 joules excite hydrogen from its ground
state?
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
-
-
-
Fig F shows the two important energy levels (out of the large number of available levels) of a neon atom,
for its use inside a He-Ne laser. Calculate the energy of the photon emitted when a neon atom electron
excited to the n = A level drops to level B. Give your answer in electronvolts.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Other than by absorbing photons, explain how a ground state atom of mercury could be excited if it were
in the tube of a compact fluorescent light bulb.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Explain why the light from a compact fluorescent light bulb containing mercury gas will produce a
spectrum of various colours when electricity passes through the gas.
-
-
-
-
-
-
6
Estimate the number of photons hitting your face each second when you stand in the sunshine.
ground state
Ne
fig F Electron de-excitation in a
neon atom.
Kev definitions
The ground state is the lowest energy level for a system. For example, when all the electrons in an
atom are in the lowest energy levels they can occupy, the atom is said to be in its ground state.
Excitation is an energy state for a system that is higher energy than the ground state. For example, in an
atom, if an electron is in a higher energy level than the ground state, the atom is said to be 'excited'.
lonisation energy is the minimum energy required by an electron in an atom's ground state in order to
remove the electron completely from the atom.
A line spectrum is a series of individual lines of colour showing the frequencies present in a light source.
201
BIGGER
SOLAR CELLS TO POWER THE USA? W
WP
In this activity, you will consider the quantity of solar cells that might be needed to generate enough
electricity for the USA, analyse the limitations on making such a calculation, and discuss the practical
difficulties in implementing such a plan.
AMAZING MAP: TOTAL SOLAR PANELS TO POWER THE
UNITED STATES
Solar panels to fulfill U.S.
electricity demand
(with caveats)
1 = 44 miles per side
CAVEATS AND PROBLEMS
That is a lot of solar panels! 3 billion of them. However it is an
interesting thought to consider the total approximate cost of these
panels compared with what the United States government spends
every year on everything else... If one approximates each panel
to cost $250, the total cost would be $767 billion. To put it in
perspective, the government spent $3600 billion in 2012.
The raw materials and manufacturing capability would be
enormous to build that many panels.
The infrastructure and additional equipment needed would be
tremendous.
It's dark at night - no solar power generation... so traditional
power would required during those times. A battery storage bank
would be unimaginably huge for night storage at these power
levels...
Solar panels and inverters are not 100% efficient. There will be
cloudy days.
Less sun during the winter months unless this was built on the
equator.
This map illustrates the total area of solar panels that would be
needed to fulfill the electricity demands of the United States. The
United States Energy Information Association (eia.gov) reveals in
their December 2013 Electrical Power Annual report, in the table
below, that the peak load for all interconnections of electricity
during the summer of 2012 was 767 762 Megawatts within the
contiguous United States. It is also reported that total electricity
consumption for the United States during 2012 was 3 694 650
million kWh (million kilowatt-hours).
3 694 650 000 000 kWh Total 2012
10 122 328 767 123 Wh Daily Average
421 763 698 630
W
Hourly Average
767 762000000 W
Peak Load
I imagined using a 250-watt Sharp ND-250QCS solar panel (made
in the USA) 65" x 39" each.
767 762 000 000 watts / 250 watts per panel
3071 048 000 total panels
PER PANEL
TOTAL NEEDED
2535 sq."
54063 240833 sq.'
1939 sq. miles
44 miles per side of square
A SOLUTION
While it may not be doable to build a central location for our
nation's electricity needs, it is very doable to augment one's own
electricity needs with solar photovoltaic panels. Even building
an off-grid system is entirely within the realm of possibilities for
many people.
In any event, it was an interesting exercise to determine how
much total area of solar panels would fulfill the nation's electricity
demands. It's a smaller footprint than I initially thought it would
be...
17.6 sq.
Where else will I encounter these themes?
1.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
202
TOPIC 5
Waves and the particle nature of light
CHAPTER
5.4 Quantum Physics
Introduction
Albert Einstein is probably the most famous physicist of the 20th century. Away from the Newtonian bias of
England, Einstein is probably the most famous physicist ever. So what did a clerk in the Swiss patent office,
who mostly educated himself, produce that could make him so important? In 1905, Einstein had what is
often referred to as his Annus Mirabilis - year of miracles - in which he published scientific papers on four
separate topics. All four papers made significant breakthroughs in the topics they were concerned with,
and were diverse, not directly related to each other. His paper on the photoelectric effect won Einstein the
1921 Nobel Prize for Physics.
In this chapter, we will be dealing with the ideas that electromagnetic radiation, such as light, and
WP particles, such as electrons, can behave as both waves and particles. Usually we only observe one
aspect or the other, such as the photoelectric effect demonstrating that light can be a particle.
Scientists are still not clear on an explanation for both light and electrons that can universally
describe their behaviour under all circumstances. Einstein helped us along the way, but he did not
solve the underlying conundrum. Maybe someday you will.
All the maths you need
• Units of measurement (e.g. the electronvolt, eV)
• Use of standard form and ordinary form (e.g. using a wavelength of light)
Changing the subject of an equation (e.g. using the photon energy equation)
• Solving algebraic equations (e.g. finding the colour of light emitted by an excited atom)
Substituting numerical values into algebraic equations (e.g. a photoelectric effect calculation)
• Determining the slope and intercept of a linear graph (e.g. analysing the photoelectric cell data)
188
5.4 Exam-style questions
1 What is the energy of a photon of yellow light, with a
wavelength of 550 nm?
(a) 5.79 x 10-38J
(b) 3.62 x 10-21 J
(c) 3.62 x 10-19 J (d) 2.26J
[Total: 1]
4 An electronics student is using light emitting diodes (LEDs)
to make a traffic light model. He uses red, orange and green
LEDs. The table gives information about these LEDs. They are
identified as 1, 2 and 3.
[1]
LED
Colour
Frequency/
1014 Hz
5.66
5.00
Wavelength/
10-9m
530
600
2
2 Use information in the diagram, showing energy levels for
electrons in a hydrogen atom, to calculate the frequency of a
photon of light emitted by an electron moving from the level
n= 4 to the ground state.
E = 0J
E = -1.36 X 10-19 J7
E = -2.42 X 10-19
4.41
680
un= 0000
LIL
(a) Complete the table by filling in the colour of light emitted
by each LED.
[1]
(b) Calculate the energy of the lowest energy photon emitted
by this traffic light model.
[Total: 4]
[3]
L
E, = -5.45 X 10-19J
energy (J)
quantum number, n
5 In 1921. Albert Einstein won the Nobel Prize for his work on
the photoelectric effect.
The results of experiments on the photoelectric effect show that:
photoelectrons are not released when the incident radiation
is below a certain threshold frequency:
• the kinetic energy of the photoelectrons released depends
on the frequency of the incident light and not its intensity.
Explain how these results support a particle theory, but not a
wave theory of light.
[6]
[Total: 6]
6 The graph shows how the maximum kinetic energy E of
photoelectrons emitted from the surface of aluminium varies
with the frequency fof the incident radiation.
E = -2.18 X 10-18 JL
Jn= 1
(a) 8.20 x 10-20 Hz
(c) 3.08 x 1015 Hz
(b) 2.42 x 10-6 Hz
(d) 2.05 x 1014 Hz
[1]
[Total: 1]
E/eV
3 A zinc plate illuminated by ultraviolet light will emit
photoelectrons. Which of the following would not be observed
using the same zinc plate?
(a) Photoelectrons would still be emitted using shorter
wavelength UV light
(b) More photoelectrons would be observed each second using
brighter UV of the original wavelength
(c) The stopping voltage for the photoelectrons would be
decreased using UV light with a longer wavelength
(d) The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons would
be increased using brighter UV of the original wavelength
[1]
[Total: 1]
o 2 4 6 5 10 12 14 16 18 20
f/10'4Hz
(a) Explain why no photoelectrons are emitted below a
frequency of 10 x 1014 Hz.
(b) Calculate the work function of aluminium in electron
volts.
(c) State the quantity represented by the gradient of the
graph.
Add a second line to the graph to show how E varies
with f for a metal which has a work function less than
aluminium
[2]
[Total: 7]
204
5.
41
Wave-particle duality
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand how the behaviour of electromagnetic radiation
can be described in terms of both waves and photons
use the equation E = hf for the energy of a photon of
electromagnetic radiation
Light is a wave
We have seen numerous instances of light undergoing wave-like
activities.
Evidence that light is a wave
The interference pattern produced by diffraction and Young's
two-slit experiment both require the superposition of wave
displacements to generate the standing wave pattern seen. This is
only possible if light is behaving as a wave and has the appropriate
repeating cycles of displacement that cause this ongoing
superposition to maintain the constructive and destructive
interference that produces nodes and antinodes. Particles cannot
superpose in this way.
Huygens' principle
The Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens came up with a principle
for predicting the future movement of waves if we know the
current position of a wavefront. The basic idea is to consider
that any and every point on the wavefront is a new source of
circular waves travelling forwards from that point. When the
movement of these myriad circular waves is plotted, and then
their superposition considered, the resultant wave will be the new
position of the original wavefront.
secondary wavelets
new wavefront
secondary sources
fig C Superposition effects, such as standing wave interference patterns, are
only possible if light behaves as a wave.
Polarisation is another phenomenon exhibited by electromagnetic
waves, including light, that can only be explained in classical
physics by using the ideas of waves.
original wavefront
fig A Huygens' construction for explaining the movement of waves.
Huygens" geometrical system exactly explains all the basic
phenomena we see light undergoing. We can make drawings
like fig A to correctly predict the movement of wavefronts in
reflection, refraction, diffraction fig B, interference and straight-
line propagation of light.
-
-
Light is a particle
In some cases, the examples of light acting as a wave are
phenomena that can only occur for waves. In Section 5.4.2
we will look in detail at the photoelectric effect. This was first
observed in 1887 by Heinrich Hertz (after whom the unit for
frequency is named), but it was not until the beginning of
the twentieth century that an adequate explanation of the
phenomenon was made. Working on the basis of Max Planck's
1901 suggestion that light could exist as quantised packets of
energy called photons, Einstein produced a paper called, in
English, Concerning an Heuristic Point of View Toward the Emission
and Transformation of Light. Einstein wrote four important papers
in 1905, including one on relativity and one regarding E = mc,
but it was the explanation of the photoelectric effect for which
he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics. Crucially, the
photoelectric effect cannot be explained using a wave theory for
light. However, the idea that light travels as particles, or photons,
whose energy is proportional to the frequency it would have when
considered as a wave, fits all the observations exactly.
WM
fig B Huygen's construction correctly predicts diffraction through a gap.
190
What have I studied before?
• Diffraction and interference of light
Detailed knowledge of the parts of the
electromagnetic spectrum, and the frequencies of
electromagnetic radiations
Models of waves and wave processes
The existence and properties of the electron
The electronic structure of atoms
Macroscopic emission and absorption of light
What will I study later?
• Details about the smallest fundamental particles
yet found (A level)
Blackbody radiation of all wavelengths of
electromagnetic radiation, and the colours of
stars (A level)
How to calculate the wavelength of an electron
(A level)
Experimental investigations of the structure of
subatomic particles (A level)
The process of thermionic emission, and its
similarities to and differences from the
photoelectric effect (A level)
What will I study in this chapter?
The idea of wave-particle duality, and the nature
of light
Photon energy
• The photoelectric effect
Electron diffraction and interference
How light is created
189
Thinking Bigger
5.4
Let us start by considering the nature of the writing in the article.
1. The article opposite was written for an American website blog. Consider the article and
comment on the type of writing being used. Think about for example whether this is a
scientist reporting the results of their experiments, a scientific review of data, a
newspaper or magazine style article for a specific audience. Try and answer the
following questions:
a. Is there any bias present in the report? What parts of the article suggest any bias?
b. How has the author adapted their use of language to suit their audience? Would
the wording be different for example if they were trying to explain the same ideas to
primary school children? Or to a US government committee for energy infrastructure?
C. Discuss the extent to which the caveats and problems' highlighted by the author
undermine the basic premise of the article.
555880000000001
Command word
If you're asked to
discuss something you
first need to identify
the information you
should talk about. (Here,
the bullet points will
help you.) Then explore
and investigate that
information. You answer
might take the form of
a carefully considered
argument.
Now we will look at the physics in, or connected to, this article. Some of these questions will link to
topics in much earlier sections of this book, so you may need to combine concepts from different
areas of physics to work out the answers. Use the timeline at the bottom of the page to help you put
this work in context with what you have already learned in your course.
2. Convert all the dimensions quoted in the article into Sl units: (1 inch, 1" = 2.54 cm;
1 foot, 1' = 12 inches; 1 mile = 1.6 km)
3. The radiation from the Sun lands on Earth with a power of approximately 1000 W m-2
How much sunlight power would land on one of the solar panels considered in the
article?
4. If the average wavelength of light from the sun landing at the surface of the Earth were
taken to be 550 nm, how many photons would be landing on this one solar panel per
second? Discuss whether it is reasonable to make this wavelength average for this
calculation.
5. If the panel produces 250 W, what is the efficiency of one solar panel?
6. The manufacturer further claims that the panel is made up of 60 individual solar cells in
series, and the maximum output voltage is 29.8 V. What is the emf produced by each of
the 60 cells, and what is the maximum output current?
155500808806800
Activity
Many working environments require people to be able to communicate scientific ideas in persuasive
ways. Imagine you work for a US electricity generating company that specialises in nuclear power
stations. Prepare a critique of this blog article which could be used to persuade the public that the
author's idea, for solar power to be used to generate all of America's electricity needs, is impractical and
too expensive. You should not explain any benefits of using other means, such as nuclear power your
brief is simply to put the public off the idea of large solar power stations.
We have not yet
considered the
practicalities of
connecting the giant
solar power station
to the national grid to
transport the electricity
all over the USA. Some
calculations about
quantity and cost of
cabling and pylons
could add some weight
to your critique
By Ken Jorgustin, from Modern Survival Blog, http://modernsurvivalblog.com
.
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
YOU ARE
HERE
203
Quantum physics
5.4
II
E = OJ
E = -1.36 X 10-19 J
E = -2.42 x 10-19 J
n=4
n= 3
E = -5.45 X 10-19 J
n= 2
If an electron is already excited, after a random amount of time
it will de-excite. This may involve dropping straight down to the
ground state, or it may drop to an intermediate level if there is
one. Fig C shows an excited hydrogen electron dropping from
energy level n= 4 down to n=3. As the electron ends up with
less energy than it had, the conservation of energy requires
that this energy is emitted as a photon with exactly the energy
difference between the levels. The frequency of the emitted
photon can be calculated from the equation for photon energy,
E = hf. Thus, a collection of gas atoms that are excited will emit
light with a particular collection of frequencies, dependent on
which element the gas atoms are.
WORKED EXAMPLES
energy (J)
quantum number, n
What are the frequencies of the photon absorbed in fig B and the
photon emitted in fig C?
In fig B, the electron is raised from level n = 1 up to level n = 2.
The energy difference between the levels - the energy gained by
the electron - must equal the energy of the absorbed photon.
From the diagram, the energy level difference is 1.635 x 10-18).
AE = Ex - E, = 1.635 x 10-18)
AE = hf
E =
-2.18 X 10-18 J
n=
1
fig B Electron excitation in a hydrogen atom. For ease of reference, the energy
levels are numbered with integers from n = 1 for the ground state,
upwards.
An incident photon that does not have the energy exactly
equivalent to a jump between the current position of the electron
and one of the higher levels will not be absorbed - the photon and
electron will not interact at all. If gas atoms are illuminated by a
range of frequencies (colours), those with the correct frequency
values will be absorbed, so there will be some colours missing
from the light after it passes through the gas.
E = OJ
= -1.36 X 10-19)
= -2.42 X 10-19 J
f-1.635 x 10-18
6.63 x 10-34
f = 2.47 x 1015 Hz
In fig C, the electron drops from level n = 4 down to level n = 3.
The energy difference between the levels - the energy lost by the
electron - must equal the energy of the emitted photon.
From the diagram, the energy level difference is from -1.36 x
10-19) down to -2.42 * 10-19).
AE = E3 - E4 = -2.42 x 10-19 - -1.36 10-19 = -1.06 x 10-19)
The fact that this energy value is negative indicates that energy is
given out here.
l
E,= -5.45 X 10-19 J
12
f_1.06 x 10-19
16.63 x 10-34
f= 1.60 x 1074 Hz
energy (J)
quantum number, n
lonisation
Fig A shows the ground state energy of a hydrogen atom is 2.18
X 10-18 J, which is equivalent to 13.6 electronvolts. The n=co
level at the top of the diagram has an energy value of zero. At this
level, the electron has left the atom - the hydrogen is ionised. This
means that the energy required to ionise an atom of hydrogen in
its ground state, its ionisation energy, is 13.6 eV.
E = -2.18 X 10-18jL
n =
1
Learning tip
Hydrogen has the simplest energy level system as it only has one
electron, but everything explained here is applicable to an electron
in any atom. All we need is the energy level diagram and we can
calculate the frequencies of photons emitted and absorbed for a
variety of energy level transitions.
fig C Electron de-excitation in a hydrogen atom.
199
The photoelectric effect
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain the photoelectric effect and experimental
observations of it
understand how the photoelectric effect provides evidence
for the photon model of light
use the photoelectric effect equation
ultra
violet light
negatively
charged
zinc plate
Gold leaf falls immediately
the zinc plate is illuminated
with ultra violet light.
Photoelectrons
If ultraviolet light is shone onto a negatively charged zinc plate,
the plate loses its charge. The explanation for this is that the light
causes electrons to leave the metal, removing the negative charge.
The electrons that are released are called photoelectrons.
However, variations on this experiment throw up some surprising
observations. There is a certain minimum amount of energy that
an electron needs in order to escape the surface of the metal
it is in. This energy is called the work function, and has the
symbol, o.
The wave theory of light would allow some of the wave energy
to be passed to the electrons to enable them to gain the work
function and escape. In the wave theory, the energy carried
by a wave depends on its amplitude, which for light means its
brightness. So the wave theory would predict that any colour
of light, if made sufficiently bright, should enable the release
of photoelectrons. Alternatively, if the wave were of smaller
amplitude, it could shine for longer and slowly pass energy to
the electrons, until they had gained as much as the work function
and escape. However, this is not what is observed. The same
negatively charged zinc plate cannot be discharged by red light, no
matter how bright or how long the illumination. No photoelectrons
are emitted under red light. There is a maximum wavelength for
the light, above which no photoelectrons are ever emitted. This
can be thought of equivalently as a minimum frequency for the
light, known as the threshold frequency.
fig A Demonstrating the photoelectric effect.
If you attempt to discharge the electroscope with an ordinary desk
lamp, or sunlight, there will be very little effect as these sources
provide little UV light intensity, and longer wavelengths will not
cause the photoelectric effect with zinc. Even if you left the
electroscope in front of the desk lamp for several hours, it would not
discharge. However, the UV light need not be very bright, and it will
still immediately cause discharge.
Investigation
Investigating photoelectrons
If you charge a gold leaf electroscope then it will show a deflection
on the gold leaf. If you place a zinc plate on top of the electroscope,
the photoelectric effect will allow the electroscope to be discharged
if it held a negative charge. If you shine UV light onto the zinc plate,
the gold leaf will fall immediately. This observation shows that
electrons on the zinc plate have escaped. Those electrons remaining
on the gold leaf and electroscope stalk spread out more, so that
there is no longer enough mutual repulsion to hold up the gold leaf.
You may need to clean the surface of the zinc, as it oxidises quite
easily in air, so there may be a layer of oxide on top of the pure
metal, stopping the light absorption.
The explanation for these experimental observations can be
summarised as:
• Light travels as photons, with a photon's energy proportional
to the frequency
• When a photon encounters an electron, it transfers all its
energy to the electron (the photon ceases to exist).
If an electron gains sufficient energy - more than the work
function - it can escape the surface of the metal as
a photoelectron
Brighter illumination means more photons per second, which
will mean a greater number of photoelectrons emitted per
second.
If an electron does not gain sufficient energy from an
encounter with a photon to escape the metal surface, it will
transfer the energy gained from the photon to the metal as a
whole before it can interact with another photon. Thus, if the
photon energy is too low, no photoelectrons are observed.
193
5.
42
The photoelectric effect equation
Einstein developed an equation to explain the photoelectric effect, which is based fundamentally on
the conservation of energy. We have previously seen that the energy of a light photon can be found
from E= hf. An electron gaining this energy from a photon will have to use up the amount of energy
equal to the work function in order to escape the metal surface. If before that the electron needs to
travel up to the surface from deeper in the metal, it will have used up some additional energy along
the way. Only the remaining energy will be available to be used by the electron as the kinetic energy
to fly away. Therefore, the kinetic energy that the electron can have on departure from the metal
surface is less than or equal to the difference between the photon energy and the work function.
This maximum possible kinetic energy m2max determines the maximum velocity Vmax of the
photoelectron. Einstein's photoelectric effect equation then is:
žmv max = hf - 0
Or, in direct conservation of energy terms, the photon energy is used by the electron partly to escape
the metal surface and partly as its kinetic energy. So, a rearrangement of the equation is:
hf = 0 + mvamax
WORKED EXAMPLE
Learning tip
The SI units for the terms
in the photoelectric effect
equation are all joules (), but it
is often used in units of
electronvolts (eV). Remember
that:
1 eV = 1.6 x 10-19)
What is the work function of potassium if green light with a wavelength of 510 nm shining on it
produces photoelectrons that have a maximum kinetic energy of 0.14 eV?
mv_max = hf - •
.. $=hf - 3mvmax
mv-max = 0.14 eV = 0.14 1.6 10-19 = 2.24 x10-20)
6.63 x 10-34 x 3 x 10° 2
hf=hc
V 510 * 10-9
0= hf - mv2 max = 3.9 x 10-19 -2.24 x 10-20
0= 3.68 x 10-19)
The photoelectric cell experiment
photoelectrons
incident
light
variable power supply
photocell
LLA
fig B A photoelectric effect cell experiment circuit.
We could use the photoelectric effect equation to measure Planck's constant and the work function
for a metal. In a vacuum, we place the metal as the anode in a cell that has a gap to the cathode -
see fig B. When we shine light of a known frequency onto the anode, photoelectrons will be emitted
and the current registered on the ammeter. If we slowly increase the pd across the photoelectric cell,
eventually the anode will become sufficiently positive that all photoelectrons will be stopped and
attracted back to it, so the photoelectric current will be zero. This stopping voltage, V., will give us
the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons, from the definition of voltage:
imvmax = e XV,
If we use a range of light frequencies and find the stopping voltage for each, we can plot a graph
of the photoelectron maximum kinetic energy, on the y-axis, against frequency, on the x-axis.
Comparison with the equation for a straight line shows us that the graph should produce a straight
best-fit line and the gradient will be equal to Planck's constant.
mvmax = hf - ©
y = mx + c
194
5.4
Line spectra
Light made up of multiple wavelengths (colours) can be split up to show which colours are present.
This could be done using a diffraction grating in which the amount of diffraction is dependent on
the wavelength, and so the various colours will spread different amounts. The resulting spectrum will
often be a series of individual lines, if the original light contained only a select few wavelengths. Such
a line spectrum is the typical result of exciting the atoms of a gas, perhaps by heating the gas.
400nm
500 nm
fig D Hydrogen emission line spectrum.
600'nm
700nm
Learning tip
Remember that c = fa, so photons that all have the same frequency will also all have the same wavelength
(colour).
For example, fig D shows the line spectrum from hydrogen gas. The gas has electricity passed
through it, and this will excite the hydrogen atoms. Each coloured line is a wavelength of light given
off as a result of an electron dropping between two energy levels. The different energy gaps cause
the difference in wavelengths emitted. When viewed all together, the colours merge, and the gas
glows a purple colour.
Investigation
WP
Investigating gas discharge spectra
A high voltage will cause an electric current to pass through a gas in a discharge tube. The electrical energy
excites the electrons in each atom of the gas, and they then drop energy levels at random times, giving off
a photon for each energy level transition. As there are so many atoms, it appears as if the gas is
continuously emitting light, and of all the possible colours - all the possible transitions within its energy
level ladder. Using a diffraction grating, we can analyse the light emitted from the tube to detect the
separate colours, or wavelengths, being emitted. We observe a line spectrum.
fig E A gas discharge tube demonstrates the emission of photons by excited electrons of hydrogen gas. A diffraction
grating shows the separate lines in the spectrum.
If we change the tube for one containing a different gas, we will observe a different line spectrum.
200
5.
41
Electrons are waves
If electrons are made to travel at very high speeds, they will pass through gaps and produce
a diffraction pattern. They will similarly interact with a double-slit apparatus to produce the
interference pattern seen when waves pass through two slits. Diffraction and interference are not
expected by classical particles, as they should simply travel straight through the slits. Observation of
these experimental results proves that electrons can behave as waves.
Waves or particles?
The experimental observations highlighted in this section have suggested that both electrons and
electromagnetic radiation seem to contradict our explanations of them. Physicists have good
theoretical descriptions of the wave and particle natures for electrons and also for electromagnetic
radiation. However, we do not have a complete and perfect single theory that explains both correctly.
for either electrons or EM radiation.
Phenomenon
Evidence for waves
Evidence for particles
light
diffraction, interference, polarisation photoelectric effect
electron
diffraction, interference
ionisation
table A Summary of the evidence for light and electrons behaving as waves or particles.
The idea that these things behave as waves under certain circumstances and as particles under other
circumstances is known as wave-particle duality.
Questions
| Suggest an experiment that demonstrates:
(a) light behaving as a wave
(b) electrons behaving as waves.
2 What is the energy of a photon of UV light that has a wavelength of 2 x 10-7m?
Demonstrating the polarisation of a beam of electrons requires a complex experiment. If electrons were
shown to be travelling like polarised light, explain whether this would confirm that the electrons were
particles or waves.
4
is light a wave or a particle? Explain your answer.
Draw a picture illustrating how Huygens' construction could explain diffraction of sea waves around a
large rock.
Key definitions
Photons are 'packets' of electromagnetic radiation energy where the amount of energy E = hf, which is
Planck's constant multiplied by the frequency of the radiation: the quantum unit that is being considered
when electromagnetic radiation is understood using a particle model.
Quantisation is the concept that there is a minimum smallest amount by which a quantity can change:
infinitesimal changes are not permitted in a quantum universe. The quantisation of a quantity is analogous
to the idea of the precision of an instrument measuring it.
Wave-particle duality is the principle that the behaviour of electromagnetic radiation can be described in
terms of both waves and photons.
192
5.
44
Atomic electron energies
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
understand atomic line spectra in terms of energy level transitions
calculate the frequency of radiation emitted or absorbed in an electron energy transition
Electron energy levels
In Section 3.1.6 we saw that electrons in semiconductors can have varying amounts of energy, and
that the energy they have can put them into the valence band or conduction band. These energy
bands are wide in solids - there is a large range of values of energy that the electron could have and
still be in that band. In free atoms, such as those in a gas, the energy values that the electrons could
have are limited to a small number of exact values, often called energy levels.
E = OJU
n= 6000
Ex= -1.36 X 10-19 J
E = -2.42 x 10-19 J
n= 3
I
E =
-5.45 X 10-19 J
energy (J)
quantum number, n I
E = -2.18 X 10-18 JL
n = 1
fig A An energy level diagram for hydrogen. The energy values are negative, as we have to put energy in to lift the
electron up from the ground state.
Excitation and de-excitation
Fig A illustrates the energy values that electrons of hydrogen could have. Under normal
circumstances, an electron in an atom of hydrogen would be in its ground state. This is the lowest
energy level, with a quantum number (or level) of n = 1. In order to move up energy levels, the
electron must take in some energy. This is called excitation Electrons can become excited if the
atom collides with another particle. Alternatively, if the electron absorbs a photon that has exactly
the correct amount of energy, the electron can jump to a higher energy level. For example, the
difference in energy between the ground state (-2.18 x 10-18 J) and the n = 2 state (-5.45 X 10-19 J)
is 1.635 x 10-18 J.
A photon with exactly this energy could be absorbed by an electron in the ground state of hydrogen,
and this would lift the electron up to the energy level above the ground state, n = 2, and the photon
would no longer exist. This is illustrated in fig B.
198
Quantum physics
5.4
of an electron beam can be controlled by altering the voltage
applied to accelerate the electrons. In some instances, this
can mean the wavelength of electrons in the beam can be
10-10m - the same size as atoms. As a rough rule of thumb, the
minimum-sized object that can be imaged by any wave is about
the same size as the wavelength. In this example, the electron
waves are 1000 times shorter than light waves, and so they can
produce images of objects 1000 times smaller than visible light.
fig D An electron beam diffraction tube demonstrates the wave nature
of electrons.
If we make careful measurements of the dimensions of the tube and
the diffraction pattern produced with different accelerating voltages,
we can carry out an approximate calculation of the atom spacing
in graphite.
Two-slit electron interference
In 1965, Richard Feynman suggested that electrons should also be
able to produce the two-slit interference pattern seen with light, as
they can behave as waves. Recently, this has been shown to be the
case, giving further evidence for the wave nature of electrons.
fig F Electron microscopes can have a magnification up to 10 million times.
These bacteria are about 1 micrometre long.
:
fig E Recent experiments have been able to demonstrate electrons producing
an interference pattern when passed through a two-slit-type experiment.
The five images here show the same image after different amounts of
time. The particle electrons hit the screen in places that slowly build up
the wave interference pattern.
fig G Electron microscopes have sufficient magnification to see the results of
manipulation of individual atoms. This Atom Boy image was made by
researchers at IBM who moved individual carbon monoxide molecules
on a surface of copper metal.
Questions
However, the latest research has allowed scientists to observe that
the interference pattern is built up by the movement through the
apparatus of the individual electrons. They are behaving as both
individual particles and waves at the same time. They are showing
wave-particle duality.
Give an example of electrons behaving as a wave, and explain why
this can only occur for waves.
Why would an electron microscope beam need to be accelerated
through a higher voltage in order to view a smaller object?
Electron microscopy
One of the most important applications of the wave nature
of electrons is its use to study objects at very small scales. An
electron beam can work like a beam of light, but with some
different properties that can make the electron beam much more
useful for microscopy. The main advantage is that the wavelength
What would be the wavelength of electrons that had been
accelerated through a 400 V pd?
Estimate the de Broglie wavelength of a football in flight towards
the goal.
197
Quantum physics
5.4
Photon energy
For electromagnetic radiation, the energy of the photon can be calculated by multiplying the
frequency by Planck's constant, h. This constant has an extremely small value because it represents
the fundamental minimum possible step in energy. In SI units, h= 6.63 x 10-34 J s. If we work on
very small scales, photons cannot have energy values that differ by less than the Planck constant.
This means that there are some energy values that are impossible in our Universe. Such a system of
minimum sized steps is called quantisation.
The energy of a photon is given by the equation:
photon energy () = Planck's constant (s) frequency (Hz)
E = hf
WORKED EXAMPLES
Calculate the energy of a photon of yellow light that has a wavelength of 550 nm.
E = hf
c=fa
cc 3x108_- 5.45 1014 Hz
"1 550 10-
95.
E = 6.63 x 10-34 x 5.45 x 1014
E = 3.6 x 10-19
Calculate the frequency of a gamma ray photon that has 2.24 x 10-14 joules of energy
E = hf
F_E_2.24 x 10-14
m en 6.63 x 10-34
f = 3.38 x 1019 Hz
Electrons are particles
Experiments that produce ions can demonstrate electrons behaving as particles because a fixed lump
of mass and charge is removed from the atom in order to change the atom into an ion. The charge to
mass ratio is a uniquely identifying property of particles, and was first demonstrated for the electron
by JJ. Thomson in 1897. Robert Millikan, in an experiment finally published in 1913, took this one
step further to find the electron charge itself. The fact that electrons hold a fixed amount of charge
and a fixed mass indicates they are localised particles.
fig D Robert Millikan's oil drop apparatus showed that electrons have a fixed charge of 1.5924 x 10-19 coulombs.
The difference with the currently accepted value is caused by a mistake in Millikan's calculations, because
he used a slightly incorrect value for the viscosity of air.
WP
191
5.4
Electron diffraction and interference
Scattering intensity
By the end of this section, you should be able to...
explain how diffraction experiments provide evidence for the
wave nature of electrons
describe other evidence for the wave nature of electrons
be able to use the de Broglie equati
We have seen that waves passing through a gap will produce a
diffraction pattern with bright and dark fringes as the diffracted
waves from each side of the gap superpose to produce the
interference pattern.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Scattering angle 0
fig C Davisson and Germer's electron beam reflection from a surface of atoms,
acting as a reflection grating, showed variable intensity at different angles,
exactly as is observed with waves.
Not only did Davisson and Germer prove experimentally that
electrons can behave as waves, but their results also allow
calculation of the distance between atoms in the nickel crystal.
This has given rise to advances in the study of atomic structures
using electron beam crystallography.
fig A Circular diffraction pattern caused by a laser passing through a pinhole.
Electron diffraction
As a diffraction pattern is a wave phenomenon, to observe this
from a beam of electrons means that they must be behaving as
waves. This is true whether we are passing waves through a gap,
as in fig A, or reflecting waves from a grating, as we saw in fig H
of Section 5.2.3.
filament
de Broglie equation
In 1924, a French prince called Louis de Broglie suggested electrons
could behave as waves and proposed an equation to calculate
their wavelength. Their wavelength is inversely proportional to the
momentum they have when considered as particles.
Planck's constant (JS)
electron wavelength (m) =
momentum (kgms-)
+V -
accelerating
anode
detector
WORKED EXAMPLE
electron
beam
Calculate the wavelength of electrons travelling at 10% of the
speed of light.
h
6.63 x 10-34
p 9.11 x 10-31 x 0.1 x 3 x 108
= 2.43 x 10-11 m.
nickel crystal
fig B Davisson and Germer reflected a beam of electrons from a nickel Crystal
and measured the intensity of the reflection at different angles.
In 1927, Davisson and Germer tried to detect diffraction of
electron 'waves' when they reflected from a crystal of nickel.
Fig B illustrates the experimental setup. They measured the
intensity of the beam at different angles for various accelerating
voltages, and plotted a graph of their results. Fig C shows the
graph for a beam accelerated through 54 volts.
Investigation
Investigating electron diffraction
Although they are quite expensive, some school laboratories have an
electron beam diffraction tube. This accelerates a beam of electrons
through a high voltage, and then passes the beam through a sliver of
graphite. The array of carbon atoms in the graphite acts as a
diffraction grating in two dimensions, which produces a circular
diffraction pattern. The front end of the tube has a phosphorescent
screen that will show up the diffraction pattern.
196
Quantum physics
5.4
The y-intercept will represent the value of the work function, . Also, when the value of y is zero
(the x-intercept) then the photon energy must equal the work function.
mvmax = hf -
0 = hf -
... hf = 0
This means that the value of the x-intercept will give the threshold frequency for the anode metal.
mv2max = hf -
gradient = h
frequency
threshold frequency
fig C Graphical analysis of results from a photoelectric cell experiment can determine Planck's constant and the work
function for the anode metal.
Metal Work function (eV)
cadmium
4.07
caesium
2.10
iron
4.50
nickel
5.01
zinc
4.30
table A Examples of photoelectric work function values.
Questions
| What is the work function of potassium in electronvolts?
2 (a) Why would iron not release photoelectrons if red light were shone on it?
(b) How would this result change if the red light were turned up to double brightness?
3 How does the photoelectric cell experiment described above get over the problem that the electrons
released will have a variety of kinetic energies, depending on how deep in the metal they start?
4 What is the threshold frequency of caesium?
Kev definitions
Photoelectrons are electrons released from a metal surface as a result of its exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
The work function is the minimum energy needed by an electron at the surface of a metal to escape from
the metal.
The threshold frequency for a given metal is the minimum frequency of electromagnetic radiation that
can cause the emission of photoelectrons from the metal.
The stopping voltage in an appropriately illuminated photoelectric cell is the minimum voltage needed to
reduce the photoelectric current to zero.
195
Exam-style questions
5.4
7 The diagram shows the lowest three energy levels of a
hydrogen atom.
-1.5
ultraviolet radiation
S zinc plate
-3.4 -
energy/eV
– 13.6 -
[2]
(a) Excited hydrogen atoms can emit light of wavelength
6.56 x 10-7m.
(i) Calculate the frequency of this light.
(ii) The energy of a photon of this frequency is
3.03 X 10-19 J.
By means of a calculation determine which electron
transition emits this photon.
[2]
(b) The spectrum of light from the Sun has a dark line at a
wavelength of 656 nm. In the spectrum of light received
from a distant galaxy, the corresponding line appears at a
wavelength of 690 nm.
Explain what the observation tells us about this galaxy. Do
not include calculations in your answer.
[2]
[Total: 6]
(a) The gold leaf slowly falls.
Explain, with reference to the work function of zinc, why
this happens.
(b) Why is the effect not observed if the ultraviolet radiation
is replaced by visible light?
[1]
(c) Ultraviolet radiation of wavelength 2.00 x 10-7m is shone
onto the zinc plate.
Calculate the maximum speed of the electrons emitted
from the plate.
work function of zinc = 6.88 x 10-19 J
(d) The source of ultraviolet radiation is moved further away
from the zinc plate.
State what will happen to the maximum speed of the
electrons emitted from the plate. Justify your answer. [2]
[Total: 11]
9 The diagram shows four energy levels for an electron in a
particular atom.
energy/10-1'J
level 4
not to scale
8 A gold leaf electroscope is used to detect very small amounts
of charge. When the electroscope cap is negatively charged,
electrons spread along the metal rod and the gold leaf so they
both become negatively charged. The rod and leaf repel each
other, so the gold leaf rises up.
-2.8
level 3 -
level 2
-32
electroscope cap
- insulator
metal rod
gold leaf
TES
case
level 1
--6.4 ground state
(a) State what is meant by an energy level.
[1]
(b) Draw on the diagram two arrows to indicate two different
transitions that would result in emitted radiation of the
same frequency
[2]
(c) A gas consisting of these atoms can emit a line spectrum.
Explain how this happens.
[3]
(d) One of these atoms in its ground state absorbs
3.6 x 10-19 J of energy from a collision with an electron.
Calculate the smallest frequency of radiation that the atom
may subsequently emit.
(e) Calculate how much energy in eV would be required to
ionise the atom in its ground state.
[2]
[Total: 11]
uncharged
charged
electroscope
electroscope
A gold leaf electroscope can be used to demonstrate the
photoelectric effect. A clean zinc plate is placed onto the cap
of the electroscope and the plate and electroscope are charged
negatively. Ultraviolet radiation is shone onto the zinc plate.
205
